***Acheson – The Lobster Fiefs: Economic and Ecological Effects of
Territoriality in the Maine Lobster Industry***

*Robert Cheley*

The purpose of the paper is to examine the unique characteristics of the
lobster fisheries off the coast of Maine. These unique characteristics
include social norms about territoriality which implies ownership where
none should be, based on state recognized laws. Two types of territories
exist in Maine, termed by the author “nucleated” and
“perimeter-defended”, which are well established and backed by covert
violence. These two types of fishing territories lead to effort exertion
by the fishermen involved to differ depending on the type of
territoriality involved, which have large biological and economic
impacts.

The lobster fisheries in Maine are unique in that state regulations
impact only the length of the lobsters that can be caught, and issues
related to egg bearing females. All other norms seen are the result of
the social norms of the people involved. Becoming a lobster fisherman is
not as easy as getting a license, buying a boat and some traps.
Initiation into a fishing gang is required to fish in the bays and off
the coast. Initiation requirements include, but aren’t limited to,
ownership of land near the bay, and acceptance by the locals as being
one of theirs.

The two types of fishing areas cited the author, nucleated and perimeter
defended, occur in two different parts of the coast, east and west
respectively. Nucleated fishing areas are marked by a single fishing
gang that has rights to the fishing ground, and a strong sense of
territoriality attached to the fishing grounds. Perimeter defended
fishing areas are very strongly defined in the defined close to the
mouth of the bay where the fishers are from, but its distinction
decreases as the fishers move further away from land, leading to an
overlapping of out of bay fishing grounds claimed by individual gangs.
In both cases fishing rights are highly tied to land ownership.

The traditional fishery arrangement was the perimeter defended area, but
because of technological advances, these have begun to breakdown into
what the author has called the nucleated areas. Several factors have
contributed to the breakdown, in addition to the technological advances:
(1) conflict and political pressure and (2) the willingness to defend
the boundaries broke down because of difficulties in forming political
teams and alternative sources of income for the fishers in question.
These effects were felt differently in different areas on the coast. In
the west deep harbors made it cost effective for the in-bay fishers to
migrate out towards the ocean and invading the domain of other fishers,
while any retaliation for the encroachment was to costly to pursue by
the coastal fishers, which caused the perimeter defended areas to be
replaced with nucleated areas. The eastern part of the state did not
experience the same tendency toward nucleated fishing areas because the
bays are not deep in the state, i.e. they are closer to the ocean so the
fishermen moving out toward the ocean didn’t have an intermediate
fishing zone to cross.

The nucleated and perimeter defended areas were studied to see how their
different institutional arrangements effected the biomass of the fishing
areas. Fishermen that worked full time in nucleated areas had fewer
boats per square mile than the perimeter defended areas, due in part to
the different degrees of difficulty associated with entry into harbor
gangs mentioned above. Other difference in the two areas includes the
amount of underwater territory that was suitable for lobster fishing,
and conservation practices. For instance, conservation via trap limits,
are practiced in perimeter defended areas, but not in nucleated areas.

The biological benefits of the two areas are examined. It was found that
the average size of lobsters caught in the perimeter defended areas were
larger. The author attributes this to the conservation effects of the
perimeter defended area. This can be attributed to a large number of
lobsters caught in the nucleated areas have just reached the legal size,
so that fewer survive into larger lobsters. The resulting lower number
of large lobsters can have a huge impact on the number of eggs released,
which will influence the number of lobsters in general. Most female
lobster do not become sexually mature until they are slightly larger
than the legal limit. Given that most of the lobsters in the nucleated
area are caught, half of these should be females, which means that the
growth factor of the biomass in the nucleated areas is necessarily
reduced by the fishing practices in the nucleated areas. “This
conclusion is further buttressed by the fact that the probability of a
female reaching maturity in the perimeter defended area is 1.52, or
nearly 50% higher than it is in the nucleated areas.”[^1]

The economic benefits of the two areas were also examined. What was
found was that the perimeter defended fishers tended to make more money
than their nucleated counterparts. This is due to the fact that not only
are the lobsters in perimeter defended areas large on average, but they
do so in every season. Therefore when the nucleated fishers are selling
their fish they always have a lower weight of lobsters to sell than do
the perimeter defended fishers.

The lobstermen of Maine have evolved a system of property rights that
mitigate rent dissipation, while simultaneously pursuing conservationist
goals. These are seen in the perimeter defended areas, but are absent in
the nucleated areas. In perimeter defended areas, the resource access is
highly controlled, and engages in behavior that increases their income
levels through voluntary conservation of the resource. Contrast that
with the nucleated areas where controlling of escalated fishing has
broken down, leading to dissipation of rents, it is clear that if
regulators wish to ‘fix’ the problem they should provide incentive for
the nucleated areas to behave more like the perimeter defended areas,
provided that the costs do not outweigh the benefits.

[^1]: Page 199
