***ALS – The Determinants and Impact of Property Rights***

*Robert Cheley*

Recent empirical work in economics, law and political science has placed
emphasis on the institutional structures in societies and their ability
to determine incentives for behavior and performance economically.
Although the importance of property rights have been shown empirically
in developing markets and encouraging long-term investment, the authors
state that more work must be done “to better understand the development
of property rights, including the supply of formal title by government,
the effects of title on asset values, and the ways in which having title
may change economic behavior.”[^1] The purpose of this article is
threefold: (1) to provide empirical results on the demand for and supply
of title, (2) the impact of title on land values, and (3) the effects on
agricultural investment on Brazilian frontiers.

The authors claim that the primary determinant of land value in frontier
areas is distance to market. Other determinants of land value include
production possibilities of the land, land-specific investments, and
market exchange. They also note that title to the land will increase the
value of the land, and illustrate this graphically in figure 1(a). From
these assumptions the authors derive an individual demand for title
curve, with an inverse relationship between price and distance. What
should also be expected is that as distance from the market increases,
the private costs of obtaining title are likely to increase as well, due
in part to the travel time and costs associated with going to an
administrative center to claim the title, or to lobby for titling
services; these administrative centers may be federal or local. In
Brazil, the focus of the study, the jurisdiction assigned to federal or
state agencies differs area to area. The authors claim that “State
agencies, in response to local constituent demands, may be more likely
to subsidize the private costs of obtaining title, whereas federal land
agencies may be less responsive to local demands and more vulnerable to
changing national budget priorities.”[^2] In order to reduce some of the
costs associated with titling, governments (or their agencies) can
transfer large blocs of land to private companies that will in turn
subdivide and title the land for different purposes.

The data used for the study comes from two data sets: (1) A survey of
206 small landholders in four sites in the state of Para, near the
communities of Altamira, Tucuma, Sao Felix, and Tailandia and (2) the
Brazilian Agricultural Census from 1940 through 1970 Parana and from
1970 through 1985 for Para. The data from the census is on a county
level. The sample provides a diverse group of farmers from each of the
four communities listed above: (1) The Altamira group includes 47
farmers scattered along the TransAmazon highway under the jurisdiction
of INCRA, a state agency, (2) the Tucuma group began as a private
colonization project by CONSAG, that recruited farmers from Southern
Brazil in 1981 but is now under the control of INCRA (3) Sao Felix is a
small town with little infrastructure initially set up by ITERPA a state
agency, and (4) Tailandia was also set up by ITERPA, and is community of
around 10000 two hundred kilometers south of the state capitol.

Three models are used to estimate Land Value, Title and Investment in
the frontier. To estimate Land Value they use census data and estimate a
log-linear relationship using OLS, a Tobit estimation procedure was used
to estimate Investment, while a probit model was used to estimate Title
(since Title is a binary choice variable). There is a simultaneity
problem that exists between the Value and Title equations, but a two
stage procedure is used to alleviate this problem. Also, there may be
cross-equation error correlation between title and investment because
they both appear in the Land Value equation. To test for this a
Breusch-Pagan test is performed, but no correlation is found.

The empirical results found by the authors are consistent with the
theory they put forth at the beginning of the paper. They find that
title does increase the Land Value while Distance decreases Land Value.
They also used an interactive term test whether there is any iteration
between distance and title, finding that “a one percent increase in
distance from the market leads to a 0.37 percent decline in the value of
the titled land.”[^3] Although the regression gives the expected
theoretical signs, it does overpredict title; the model predicts 144
titled settlers, while only 127 were actually titled. The models for
Property Rights and Investment both show the predicted signs in nearly
all of the regressions for each of the time periods looked at. All of
this shows that the theory outlined in figure 1 is supported by the
empirical evidence offered by the Brazilian data set.

This study shows that there exists a demand and supply of property
rights, and that it can be estimated by use of factors that affect that
demand and government responses to that demand. The results obtained
from this story do not just lend credence to the literature on the New
Institutional Economics, but can also be applied to the literature
surrounding developmental economics to assist policy makers in decisions
regarding provisions of rights institutions leading to the success of
economic development programs.

[^1]: Page 26

[^2]: Page 34

[^3]: Page 48
