***Zerbe and Anderson – Culture and Fairness in the Development of
Institutions in the California Gold Fields***

*Robert Cheley*

The purpose of Zerbe and Anderson’s (AZ) paper is to “explain the
society formed by the California gold miners in the early years of the
gold rush.”[^1] This paper extends the work of Umbeck by applying social
norms to the situations faced by the miners. Given the repeat game setup
of the gold miners, and the existence of several equilibria, AZ explores
why the equilibrium achieved was selected. They argue that it is due to
the cultural norms of European and American society’s ideas of fairness.
They refer to these as focal points and argue that these focal points
allowed the miners to solve the huge coordination problems inherent in
the California gold rush.

AZ begin by arguing that while Umbeck is able to give an adequate
explanation about the equilibrium reached by the gold miners in
California, he provides no explanation as to why the equilibrium was
chosen given that there were many possible. AZ argues that this
incomplete explanation can be extended when you realize that the
coordination involved is a public good. “The problem with designing an
institution or evolving an institution, to accomplish cooperation is
precisely the problem of agreeing upon one solution to a coordination
game.”[^2]

A mitigating factor in this coordination problem is cultural. Culture
can provide a focal point by which the participants know what to do, and
will be able to predict the actions of other players. AZ claim that
contrary to Umbeck’s explanation of the strong imposing their will on
the weak, it was the social conventions of the miners involved. Table 1
gives a prediction to a phenomenon given that the rational choice model
is used with and without a Cultural Context. What AZ illustrates in the
table is that culture matters.

The miners that invaded the gold fields of California were mostly
American (75%). Of the twenty-five percent remaining miners, 60% were
European (either British Isles, or Continental). This nearly 90% of
miners, AZ claim, had a similar enough background to allow them to use
European norms when deciding what was fair. Although ninety percent
seems high, AZ never address if the Americans that came were first-,
second- third-, etc. generation miners. This seems like it would have a
big impact on the make up of the Americans. Another point never
addressed is what part of continental Europe these miners are from.
Although much of Europe may have similar ideas on what is fair, it seems
unreasonable to assume that they would have a completely homogenous idea
in that respect, but that is what AZ appears to say. The authors go on
to explain how the miners shared similar views on government, work,
property and punishment. While the explanation is possible, without
knowing more about the miners, I believe that the explanation lacks the
depth claimed by the authors.

The institutions of the gold fields examined by the authors include: (1)
Majority Rule, (2) Trial by Jury, (3) Claim Size, (4) Working Claims
rules and (5) First-come, first-served allocation rules. What the
authors attempt to argue here is that while the violence hypothesis
explained by Umbeck can account for these institutions the Cultural view
posited explains it better. Several examples are given in which the
violence hypothesis gives an inconsistent prediction with the actual
outcome, while the prediction by the cultural hypothesis agrees with
reality. For example, the majority rule concept was in widespread use,
but only in cultures that were predisposed to use it, i.e. American and
European workers.

The last point argues by the authors is that culture decreases
transaction costs of interaction among its members. AZ show that the
main failures of cooperation were seen between different ethnic groups,
Whites and Chinese, Whites and Hispanics, etc. They saw widespread
harassment by the American miners of the non-American miners; however,
included in non-American miners, besides the expected Latin and Native
Americans are white Australians and white Europeans. This point seems to
weaken the authors’ argument substantially. If they argue that culture
played such a big role in determining the outcomes of the social norms
of the miners, why then would miners with similar backgrounds have
problems cooperating to the point that the authors include their
cooperation failures with cooperation failures of miners with very
dissimilar backgrounds?

The authors argued the fairness served as a focal point which the miners
used as a way of solving the vast coordination problems faced. They also
argue that culture, and not violence, can explain better the outcomes
seen during the gold rush. Although they say that the violence
hypothesis does not provide completely differing conclusions, the
cultural hypothesis does a better job of explaining why certain rules,
i.e. majority rules, first come first served, were in place given all of
the possible equilibria that can be obtained in a repeated game.
Although the authors make several good points, they do skip over some
questions brought up in this summary.

[^1]: Page 115

[^2]: Page 117
