***Besley – Investment Incentives and Property Rights***

*Robert Cheley*

The purpose of Besley’s essay is to examine the theoretical links and
the empirical evidence that have been offered to explain the link
between investment behavior and property rights. Besley examines the
empirical evidence offered from twenty-one studies in Africa, Asia and
Latin America. He concludes that “in spite of its theoretical
importance, empirical support based on quantitative analysis for the
importance of secure property rights to investment is limited.”[^1]

Many empirical economists have offered instruments to try and capture
the idea of property rights, using such things as revolutions and coups
to city growth. There are many problems with these instruments, as it
can be impossible to be certain of what effects they are actually
capturing. In the case of revolutions and coups, they might proxy for
unstable property rights, but they could just as easily proxy for social
instability, which could cause, or be caused by, a lack of property
rights, thus generating a simultaneity problem. Besley notes that city
growth was used as a successful proxy for investment by De Long and
Shleifer (1993), but there study was directed more medieval and early
modern Europe, so the scope of their results could be limited.

Besley notes that economies that are fully developed are often
undesirable candidates when studying the relationship between investment
and property rights because they have been well codified over time and
do not vary much cross-sectionally over time. Therefore, most studies
have been focused on developing countries in Africa, Asia and Latin
America. A pitfall noted is that property rights enjoyed by individuals
may be heterogeneous. “It would be a mistake to think of rights as a
discrete variable that conveys full rights to dispose of an asset in any
way one chooses.”[^2] Examples given are an inability to sell land, but
an ability to bequeath it, or an inability to sell it to a particular
group of people, i.e. someone of a lower caste.

The theory developed consists of three main channels that link property
rights and investment decisions: (i) Risk of expropriation, (ii) Gains
from trade and (iii) Collateral and credit market. Clearly, if there is
a high chance of expropriation of land that you are working you are less
likely to invest heavily in it if you may not enjoy the “fruits of your
labor”. Similarly, if property rights have not been clearly defined, the
gains from trade may not be fully exploited because a party may trade
something they are known to own with a piece of land that may not be
fully recognized to belong to a second party. In the third point, notice
that if property rights are not clearly defined then there is no way to
use the land as collateral for a loan, however once the land has clearly
been marked as being owned by a party that wishes to use it as
collateral a load may be generated.

Besley claims that difficulty in identifying the impact of land rights
on investment can stem from (i) how the society emphasizes collective
ownership versus individual ownership or (ii) property rights being
endogenous determined. When ownership is communal we see the classic
free-rider problem and an underinvestment in the land, unless the
society was able to institute mechanisms to mitigate the problem. If
property rights are endogenously determined, by say the action of an
individual to title their land, the decision to title the land may not
be due to a change in property rights, but because of some other
unobserved characteristic that happens to coincide with the timing of
the change.

Of all the studies previously done, Besley notes that the empirical
relationship between property rights and investment and growth are
tenuous at best, despite the theoretical assertion that the relationship
exists. This may be due to the difficulty in accounting for investments
in non-purchased inputs. “It is inevitably difficult to be sure that one
is picking up those aspects of investment that are most important in
one’s data.”[^3]

One thing that appears to missing from the story reported by Besley is
the effects of the colonial era for the different areas of study. One
difference between that should be explored is the relationship between
the year of independence from the colonial power and adoption of
“western” ideas of property rights. The logic for this is the
paternalistic attitudes of many colonial powers and the absence of any
self governing by the indigenous people could lead to a lack of
understanding of the importance of property rights. In addition,
colonialism could lead to a society devoid of any educated leaders and
an increase in nepotism and corruption once the colonial power exits.

Also missing from the paper is any note on heterogeneity of the peoples
in the different countries. Specifically, the political lines drawn in
Africa scarcely resemble any of the historic divisions of cultures,
causing many African countries to be made up of several conflicting
factions of cultures. With lingering property rights issues from
pre-colonial times, coupled with constant (or near constant) political
flux of the region, it comes as no surprise that a relationship seems to
be lacking between land titling and investment, since the titling may be
null in a short period of time. It is disappointing that these issues
were not specifically addressed by Besley.

[^1]: Page 364

[^2]: Page 360

[^3]: Page 364
