***Bial, Houser and Libecap – Public Choice Issues in International
Collective Action: Global Warming Regulation***

*Robert Cheley*

The challenges created by negotiations regarding global problems have
been examined in the literature, but have as of yet incorporated the
ideas of public choice bargaining. The purpose of this paper is focus on
the public choice bargaining problems inherent in global negotiation
procedures regarding climatic issues. The main reason for the problem
encountered in these negotiations is due to uncertainty. This
uncertainty arises because of: (1) human sources and pace of change in
temperature, (2) The costs and benefits of global warming and their
distribution across countries, (3) costs and benefits of regulations,
and the forms of those regulations, and (4) treaty compliance by
sovereign countries. All of these issues are explored and addressed in
the paper.

In international negotiations a country is represented by an agent who
is accountable to domestic constituencies. “This agent must adopt an
international negotiating position that simultaneously leads to a
resolution of the international common-property problem and generates
the greatest political support among the electorate.”[^1] This problem
is exacerbated if there is uncertainty with estimating constituent costs
and benefits from the international action.

The authors model the collective action problem in two parts: (1)
Addressing the international task of negotiating and (2) examination of
underlying public choice concerns influence the position taken in
international negotiating. Each country’s preferences are described by a
utility function that incorporates the total net benefits received from
participation, and the net transfer made conditional on whether the
agreement is made or not.

The problem is that with this formulation and the uncertainty involved
with the expected net benefits of the constituency, agents are unsure of
the domestic support of the treaty, and they do not know for sure what
the expected net benefits are for any other country. The authors assume,
however, that there is a common distribution from which these net
benefits are taken that is common knowledge. The decision rule is based
on the AGV mechanism, which calls for implementation if and only if the
aggregated reported net benefit is positive. A couple of items worth
noting are: (1) the reported expected net benefits will determine the
initial feasibility of successful collective action, and (2) If the
status quo is viewed as more attractive than the expected utility of the
new regime a collective action solution is not likely.

This framework must be supplemented with the idea that domestic public
choice is likely to endogenous, and this must be taken into
consideration. The agent that represents a country will be interested in
maintaining political office, i.e. maximizing political support;
therefore a simple vote maximizing problem is used (see equation 5). A
key feature pointed out by the authors regarding many treaty
negotiations is that political calculations must be revised as more
information becomes available to the agent and their constituency.

To model these problems an abstract index is created, *x*. This will
allow mapping from the discussion of the Montreal and Kyoto treaties
into the above theoretical framework. The net benefit functions are
assumed to be well-behaved, i.e. concave, increasing and continuous. A
second index is defined using the previously cited abstract index, *x*,
a second index, y, is created such that a stochastic error term is
added. Using the framework of Rothschild and Stiglitz the expected
benefit that the constituent will report when faced with *x* will be
greater than when it faces *y*, so long as the benefit function is
strictly concave, as was previously assumed. What this leads to is that
the greater the uncertainty regarding the net benefits to be received by
the constituents represented by the agent, the less likely the treaty to
be agreed to. It is important to point out that new information about
the environmental problem acts as a public good, particularly that
information which affects the costs and benefits of addressing the
problem.

Important implications of this model are: (1) Successful collective
action is most likely to occur when the net benefit is positive and
large, (2) A country will report a large, positive report when all of
its constituents have large expected net benefits from the new regime,
(3) Increased uncertainty intra-country can reduce the likelihood of
international cooperation, (4) Transfer payments from countries with
expected positive net benefits to those with zero or negative expected
benefits will elicit cooperation, (5) Delay of implementation will make
more information available and may make the subsequent international
policy feasible.

The authors examine the negotiations of the Montreal Protocols regarding
CFC’s and the Kyoto protocols regarding GHG emissions. The theoretical
framework appears to agree with empirical observations made in both
cases (see tables I and II). What they find is that countries with high
costs, both in terms of net benefits and information costs inhibit the
acceptance of the protocols, and wait for more information to become
available (much like the oil fields in Texas, those with the least
amount of information gain the most by waiting to see how things “play
out”).

The theory proposed and the empirical results examined indicate that
open-access problems can be dealt with when (1) there is consensus, (2)
participants perceive positive net benefits from the new regime, (3)
homogeneity with respect to bargaining objectives and the distribution
of the costs and benefits to be incurred. However, heterogeneity does
not imply that open-access problems can not be solved; collective action
will work if (1) the heterogeneity is not too great, (2) uncertainty
regarding consequences is limited, and (3) side payments can be made to
compensate those that lose in the new regime. As suggested by the
authors’ framework, “as new information emerges and uncertainty is
reduced, political agreement may be forthcoming.” [^2]

[^1]: Page 3

[^2]: Page 29
