***Bohn & Deacon: Ownership Risk, Investment and the Use of Natural
Rights***

*Robert Cheley*

There is much anecdotal evidence to support the idea that the way a
country uses its natural resources is somehow tied to its level of
development, but there has been virtually no statistical or empirical
results to confirm this result. Bohn and Deacon make an attempt at
either verifying or refuting the relationship that exists between
natural resource use and development levels finding results that are
surprising. The general result that they find is that “the empirical
relationship between natural resource and the stage of economic
development is likely to be resource-specific and to depend critically
on the capital intensity of resource extraction.’[^1] They also find
that the political effects in their regression have a much bigger effect
that previously thought.

The literature in economic growth claims that weak ownership can
forestall investment in human- and physical-capital that is needed for
economic development, while natural resource literature claims that
incomplete property rights likely lead to overuse of resource stocks due
to free-access problems. “Combining these two suggests that excessive
use of natural resources and low levels of economic development might be
two manifestations of a single phenomenon, weak property rights.” [^2]
Bohn and Deacon point out two reasons to be skeptical of this
conclusion: (i) “formal empirical evidence on how natural resource use
responds to insecure ownership is very scarce”[^3] and (ii) “the change
in resource use that accompanies development seems to vary from resource
to resource in ways that existing discussions do not capture.”[^4]

Two questions arise from these skepticisms: (i) Are insecure ownership
rights an important factor in determining natural resource use? (ii)
What is the implied relationship between economic development and
natural resource use given that insecure ownership affects economic
growth and ordinary investment? Bohn and Deacon’s model indicate “that
differences in intensity of resource extraction can cause the effect of
ownership risk to be qualitatively different for different
resources.”[^5] This is due to the relationship between the natural
resource and the level of capital investment needed to extract the
resource. For example, the capital outlay required to find petroleum
deposits is very high, leading to a disincentive to explore for the
petroleum deposits if ownership rights are insecure. “The nature of the
relationship between resource use and ownership risk is, therefore,
essentially empirical.” [^6]

Bohn and Deacon postulate that ownership risk is related to political
attributes that are observable for a country. Then, using data on
investment rates over the whole economy and characteristics of the
political climate of the country, they estimate the relationship. They
find a highly significant and plausible relationship exists, even after
controlling for factors suggested by modern growth theory to be
included. Surprisingly, they find that high ownership risk can lead to
slower exploitation of some resources, a result contrary to conventional
wisdom. This casts doubt on the simple relationship postulated that
income growth, regardless of its source, is key to transform the use of
natural and environmental resources. This implies that reduced ownership
risks in the Third World are a mixed blessing for policy makers
concerned with the global environmental concerns of resource use.

Another result of interest is that while forest stocks are used up
quickly in situations where ownership risk is high, conforming to
conventional wisdom, it does not apply to petroleum resources. The
authors note that this is due to two separate effects: (i) high start-up
costs, i.e. heavy upfront initial investments required to find petroleum
reserves, which will cause a decrease in the over extraction of petrol
reserves, (ii) heavy extraction of known petrol reserves, due to the
ownership risk involved. The first effect is higher than the second, at
least empirically, leading to the conflict with conventional wisdom.

The conclusion of the paper suggests that the conventional wisdom
regarding ownership risks needs to be reevaluated. The authors are able
to demonstrate with their model that set of political influences is not
as nearly confined as previously thought, i.e. they should include
political regime and frequency of major constitutional change, and not
focus solely on summed frequency of coups and revolutions, and frequency
of political assassination. The relationship found indicates that moves
to democracy increase investment and moves away from democracy decrease
investment. The authors note that “if these correlations truly reflect
causations, the recent apparent trend toward democracy and reduced
political instability worldwide will have profound effects on investment
and on the way natural resources are used.”[^7]

[^1]: Page 547

[^2]: Page 526

[^3]: Page 526

[^4]: Page 526

[^5]: Page 527

[^6]: Page 527

[^7]: Page 548
