***Buchanan and Yoon – Symmetric Tragedies: Commons and Anticommons***

*Robert Cheley*

In “The Tragedy of the Anticommons: Property in the Transition from Marx
to Markets”. Heller challenges economists to address the problem of the
anticommons. Buchanan and Yoon take up the challenge analyzing the
anticommons in the context of what has been done in studying the
commons. Using the idea of usage rights and exclusion rights and a
geometric-algebraic example they show that the problem of the
anticommons is dual to the problem of the commons. In their world, the
anticommons is simply the other side of the coin of the commons problem.

In the problem of the commons there are no limits on usage of a public
good. In the problem of the anticommons there are no limits on the
rights to exclude. The example given in the paper has to do with a
parking lot near a village. Two “owners” are given the right to exclude,
with no possibility of collusion. This means that if a consumer wants to
use the lot he must obtain permission from both owners, in this case he
must buy a red and green ticket. It is easy to see that as the number of
owners increases the costs of obtaining increasing past any reasonable
reservation price. This can cause the abandonment of the good or
property, as was seen in Heller’s paper concerning empty buildings in
Moscow.

The authors show that if owners are given usage rights they engage in a
Cournot game by choosing the revenue maximizing (and in this case profit
maximizing) quantities given the level of output by their competitors;
if the owners given exclusion rights they engage in a complementary
monopoly. This occurs because in order to gain access to the good a
consumer must purchase the right to use it from two (or n) different
firms (i.e. complementary goods) where the firms are the sole provider
of that right (i.e. they operate as a monopoly). The somewhat surprising
result is that the total rents generated from both mechanisms are
identical when the demand function is linear.

It is all well and good that the solution to the commons is symmetric to
the solution of the anticommons, but do these anticommons occur often?
The answer is yes. Anyone that has had to deal with several different
agencies when trying to make changes to a home, or developers that must
deal with several governing agencies when setting up planned communities
have had to deal with this issue. Once the planned community is
finished, the residents of the homes may face anticommons problems when
trying to plan the layout of their yards (e.g. following guidelines set
forth by the home owners association and getting neighbors to sign off
on plans for back yard improvements).

Buchanan and Yoon assert that the primary thrust of the analysis of the
paper is to demonstrate formally the symmetry between over usage and
under usage of resources due to either common access problems or common
exclusion problems. They assert that this framework can be used to
analyze the problems inherent in government bureaucracies that allow
oversight by more than one agency. They also note that “allowance for
noneconomic motivation suggests that the ‘natural’ pressures toward
efficiency represented by the implementation of agreements, mergers, or
contractual arrangements generally among affected parties may be much
less effective than the formal analysis seems to imply.”[^1]

One part missing from the story is the effect that non-linear demand
functions would have in the analysis. Although I wouldn’t think it would
change the analysis, it is somewhat interesting that the authors left
out any mention of how the story might be different. Although the
authors respond to a major part of Heller’s challenge, they shouldn’t
make some of the more all encompassing statements until they have fully
addressed different forms of demand functions.

[^1]: Page 12
