***Cheung – The Structure of a Contract and the Theory of a
Non-Exclusive Resource***

*Robert Cheley*

The purpose of Cheung’s paper is to show that the existence of
externalities is due to the ad hoc nature of the categorization of
externalities in the field of economics. He claims that instead of there
being several types of externalities that instead there is only one and
it is due to the lack an existing contract between the parties involved.
He uses an approach of contractual conditions to show the reason for the
existence of the problems of the common-pool.

According to Cheung “a contract for the partial transfer of rights, such
as leasing or hiring – embodies a structure.”[^1] The purpose of the
structure is to specify (a) the distribution of income among the
participants, and (b) the conditions of resource use. Transaction costs,
natural risks and legal arrangements determine the choice of the
contract. When private property rights govern the use of all available
resources, wealth maximization requires that the stipulations of a
contract are designed to maximize resource return subject to
competition. The general structure of a contact will be such that
marginal benefits and costs are equal; however, multiple marginal
conditions require complex contracts.

Cheung notes that the preceding implies two questions: “(1) Given the
contractual stipulations, do we know that the required marginal
equalities are satisfied, (2) what bearing do there stipulations have on
the actual outcome of income distribution and resource allocation.”[^2]
For the first question, we will know whether the stipulations are
consistent with the marginal equalities. The second question is one of
contractual enforcement. “For any production process, multiple contracts
may exist. Given the form of a contract, the stipulations would be more
complex the more complex the physical attributes of inputs and
outputs.”[^3]

Cheung believes that the increase in the number of known externalities
is due not the actual existence of externalities, but can be attributed
to (1) the absence of the right to contact, (2) the presence of the
contract but with incomplete stipulations, or (3) the presence of
stipulations that are somehow inconsistent with some marginal
equalities. The key point is that with private property rights decisions
resulting in contracting stipulations will be mutually negotiated by all
parties involved. The final result is not just a contract, but a right
to exclude.

Cheung considers two hypothetical worlds: one with private property in
all resources and one with a non-exclusive fishing ground. With the use
of these two worlds Cheung is able to show that the effects of an action
are independent of the system of property rights. What is important is
whether incremental benefit can offset the incremental damage. Private
property allows for the stipulation of contracts by the owner of the
“common” good.

An interesting aspect of Cheung’s paper is his observation that (1) if
the marginal product of fisherman is less that the prevailing wage rate
why would he continue to fish and (2) what is the fisherman trying to
maximize in the context of the model of externalities? He claims that
“failure to answer these questions satisfactorily renders the
average-product argument, hence the dissipation of rent, an asserted and
not derived result.”[^4] Using an interesting approach Cheung is able to
show mathematically (and geometrically) that “if the number of competing
fisherman is reduced or restricted, each fisherman will capture part of
the ocean rent even though none has an exclusive right to the finishing
ground.”[^5] The implications of this are: (1) Ceteris paribus, the
total outlay per decision unit will be lower with non-exclusive rights
over the fishing ground than if it were private property, (2) there
exists incentives to fisherman to restrict the number of decision units
who have access to the fishing right.

In the concluding section Cheung notes that “the problem of social cost
arises in the absence of exclusive rights, or where the right to
contract exists but where contracts are peculiarly difficult to draw up
and an attempt to describe what the parties have agreed to do or not to
do … would necessitate a lengthy and highly involved document …”[^6] He
asserts that the reason for the existence of externalities is not due to
just transaction costs, or other used “excuses” but due to the inability
of society to adequately assign property rights to common-pool
resources.

[^1]: Page 50

[^2]: Page 51

[^3]: Page 51

[^4]: Page 59

[^5]: Page 63

[^6]: Page 66
