***Clark – Commons Sense***

*Robert Cheley*

Clark’s paper discusses the effect of enclosure of English common
pastures and the high rent rates that have been cited in the literature
throughout the years. With such high rates of rent, what took the
enclosure movement so long to complete the move from common pastures to
private pastures? Clark shows that the numbers that have been
historically reported have been inflated well beyond what was actually
occurring due in part to calculation error, and in part to the
phenomenon of “if its been published it must be trued” which has lead to
a widespread misconception of the growth rate in rents.

Others had pointed out reasons for the success of privatization in
England versus other European countries was the relative strength of the
ruling class in England as compared with the other Nations of Europe.
For example, enclosure of French pasturelands required unanimity of
consensus of those involved, which was due mainly to a different legal
system in France. Clark argues that the real reason isn’t just the
different institutions of the countries, but because common fields were
not very inefficient in all countries.

Clark makes use of a new, large body of data from 1500-1912 on charity
land. Clark agrees with the assessment made by previous authors that
land enclosure did raise rents, not by the outrageous levels of 100-400
percent, but by a more modest 40% or less. He argues that “the onset of
the parliamentary enclosure movement in England was the result of
changes in the costs and benefits of enclosure, not institutional
innovation or a new profit-centered ethos in the countryside.”[^1]

If Clark was able to show that the real increase in rent was only at
most 40%, why were so many previous authors able show that rent
increased by seemingly astronomical amounts? The general problem is that
several factors were not taken into account, most notably the difference
in dates when calculating rent increases without regard to the general
inflation of land prices during the same time period. In addition, when
land was transferred from common to private property it was often freed
from tithe, increasing the value of the land. These claims made their
way into the contemporary literature thanks in part to *English Landed
Society in the Eighteenth Century* by Gordon Mingay and an accompanying
paper *English Landed Society in the Nineteenth Century* by F.M.L.
Thompson. These papers are the most often cited by contemporary authors
when claiming that rents increased two to four fold during the enclosure
period.

Clark is able to show that the rent increases were much more modest
during this period by controlling for the items mentioned above. Using
data from the Charity Commission Clark shows that the actual increase in
rent is at most 40% due to the enclosure effect, regardless of whether
the size of the plot is controlled for or not.

The most disappointing aspect of his models are the very low R-squared
values. His first model comparing the ratio of rent per acre of plot at
time t and average land rent per acre of enclosed land in each decade,
which has an R-squared of only 0.02. He notes that quality of the land
may affect the results, so he uses a differences approach to eliminate
the quality component of the land. This assumes, however, that the land
quality stays constant over time, which we know from our experience with
the dust bowl is not true. Land quality can be greatly affected by the
type and intensity of cultivation that has taken place on the land. If
we choose to ignore this (which Clark seems to) we are still left with
an R-squared of only 0.01, a value it seems that is hardly worth
reporting.

Clark notes that once land is enclosed rent increases can vary greatly.
He attributes this variation to the difference in type of land that was
enclosed. For example, what is known as “waste land” was more likely to
be arable land and of less value when it was common property, so it
would make sense that it would be less even when fenced in.

An entirely different approach was also used to check the robustness of
the results achieved previously. Clark split the parishes of the English
country side into two groups: those parishes with less than 10% common
land and more than 10% common land. What we would expect to see is that
as the enclosure movement becomes more widespread the rent between the
two groups should converge if the enclosure rents doubled during the
time frame investigated (1700-1839). This is not what is seen. In fact,
there is no general trend that can be seen. The data for land rents is
very noisy and thus Clark is not able to say how much enclosure raised
rents, but the results show that it can not be more than 50%.

The data explored by Clark shows a much more ordinary relationship of
the enclosure process in England. Instead of having huge increases in
rent, we see that on average the rent gains were modest. Clark shows
that rents did indeed increase, but this was probably due the value
instilled in them as private property and not because of some other
effect. We can also see from Clark’s paper that due diligence in fully
investigating where “societal truths” come from may be in the best
interest of finding an answer that more closely coincides with the
truth, rather than just accepting those “societal truths.”

[^1]: Page 77
