***Coase – The Problem of Social Cost***

*Robert Cheley*

The main purpose of Coase’s paper is to examine “those actions of
business firms which have harmful effects on others.”[^1] Economists up
to this point (1960) had come to the conclusion that making the firm
with the offending practice either stop or compensate those it harms,
effectively giving “property rights” to those that are harmed and not to
the offending firms is the best course of action. Coase argues that this
is the “wrong” way to think about the problem. The most insightful part
of the paper is that the problem is seen from a different perspective.
“It is all a question of weighing up the gains that would accrue from
eliminating these harmful effects against the gains that accrue from
allowing them to continue.” [^2] The decision that policy makers must
make is “whether the gain that comes from preventing the harm is greater
than the loss which would be suffered elsewhere as a result of stopping
the action which produces the harm.”[^3]

We are treated with an example of a cattle-herder and a farmer. In his
example Coase assumes that there are no transaction costs. He shows that
regardless of the assignment of the property rights, an allocation that
may be called the “optimum” allocation will be reached. This is due to
the incorporation of *all* implicit costs into the analysis. Once all
costs are accounted for the real problem can be analyzed.

Coase next examines several court cases showing how the legal system has
reacted to the idea of an odious industry or firm. What Coase finds is
that while the courts may not make decisions which make sense to an
economist (and they don’t need to) the final outcomes are ones that are
consistent with the example previously cited. Once property rights are
assigned and the “efficient” allocation is reached, the only part that
property rights assignment plays is to determine who pays whom, and the
possible ranges of payment.

This leads to the main conclusion of the paper, which many jurists have
noticed, but very few economists had, namely that the problem being
discussed isn’t one of who is at fault and who has been damaged, but one
of how each party has harmed the other. It is a problem of reciprocity.
“If we are to discuss the problem in terms of causation, both parties
cause the damage. If we are to attain an optimum allocation of
resources, it is therefore desirable that both parties should take the
harmful effect (the nuisance) into account in deciding on their course
of action.”[^4] What had been overlooked is that although a factory may
produce pollution that harms the population living around it, for policy
makers to solely assign blame to the factory leaves out the possibility
for the population and the factory to bargain to an optimum allocation
in which all parties are better off than they would be if the factory
just stopped production, or if in the opposite extreme the population
incurs the cost of moving to a new location so as to not have to deal
with the polluting factory.

Next Coase tackles the problem with transaction costs included. He
notes, “Once the costs of carrying out market transactions are taken
into account it is clear that such a rearrangement of rights will only
be undertaken when the increase in the value of the production
consequent upon the rearrangement is greater than the costs with which
would be involved in bringing it about.” [^5] How the rearrangement of
rights will be accomplished is not directly addressed, but it is noted
that an administrative agency of some kind could perform the task, or a
government (or a governmental agency). This course of action would only
be taken if the costs of implementing said agency (administrative or
governmental) were not greater than costs of the market transactions
that it is designed to replace.

Next Coase dissects the argument as it had been presented, via Pigou.
What Pigou’s Treatment, as Coase describes it, tells economists is that
it must be decided what the Natural action of the problem is and if
there is any improvement that can be made upon that Natural action
through State action, with an implicit assumption that the present
arrangement is the “Natural” tendency of things, and that improvements
can only be brought about by State action (if feasible).

If we analyze Coase’s herder-farmer example from before using Pigou’s
tools of analysis, we can only come to the conclusion that either the
farmer stops farming, or the herder stops herding; there is no middle
ground, which in all likelihood isn’t desirable for either party.
Coase’s argument shows that there is an optimum allocation that inhabits
this middle ground which would be advantageous for both the farmer and
the herder.

Another problem that Coase finds with Pigou’s Treatment involves a
railway company and a farmer whose farm is next to the rail line used by
the railway company. The example involves a chance of fire starting on
the farmer’s land from sparks caused by the train operated by the
railway company. If the railway company is liable for all of the damages
to the farmer caused by any fire resulting from the railway the farmer
is paid the market price. Since the farmer gets the market price for
either taking his crops to market or by damage caused by the railway, he
is indifferent about damage caused by fire and will plant his crops
wherever he likes. However, if the railway company is not liable, then
the farmer will take out of cultivation the land for which the damage is
likely to be greater than the sale of the crops on the market. We see
that a change in policy from one where the railway is not liable to one
where it is will lead to an increase in the amount of cultivated land.
Depending on different costs associated with both the farmer and the
railway company this may or may not be an optimum allocation. From this
example we see that “the question at issue is whether it is desirable to
have a system in which the railway has to compensate those who suffer
damage from the fires which it causes or one in which the railway does
not have to compensate them”. [^6] Coase keenly points out that “When an
economist is comparing alternative social arrangements, the proper
procedure is to compare the total social product yielded by these
different arrangements.”[^7]

Coase argues that “the belief that it is desirable that the business
which causes harmful effects should be forced to compensate those who
suffer damage is undoubtedly the result of not comparing the total
product obtainable with alternative social arrangements.” [^8] If we
instead think of rights are being factors of production, these problems
will lend themselves to an analytic tool, namely Coase’s idea, which
will allow for a solution.

Finally, Coase discusses several features of Pigou’s treatment that
leads to a failure of a coherent theory. The most overlooked and perhaps
most important “stems from a faulty concept of a factor of production.
This is usually thought of as a physical entity which the businessman
acquires and uses (physical assets) instead of as a right to perform
certain (physical) actions.”[^9] What we see in this paper is that the
formation of contracts by individuals, or groups can lead to allocations
that are optimal over allocations in which one party is ordered to stop
the harmful process outright. So why is it that some problem activities
cause the creation of contracts while others don’t? According to Coase
“it would cost too much to put the matter right.”[^10]

[^1]: Page 1

[^2]: Page 26

[^3]: Page 27

[^4]: Page 13

[^5]: Page 15

[^6]: Page 34

[^7]: Page 34

[^8]: Page 40

[^9]: Page 43-44

[^10]: Page 39
