***Dahlman – The Problem of Externality***

*Robert Cheley*

Why are transactions costs so important? “Without interference in the
price mechanism, some transactions that would be beneficial are not
carried out.”[^1] By interference Dahlman is of course referring to
transaction costs. Dahlman asserts that the reason externalities exist
at all is because of transactions costs. He claims that this is true
because “if there were no transactions costs, then the potential Pareto
improvement could be realized by costless bargaining between
self-interested economic agents.”[^2] His conclusion is that
transactions costs are the “root of all evil” in the theory of
externalities. The main purpose of Dahlman’s paper is twofold: First, to
provide a systematic analysis of the idea of transactions costs as they
pertain to externalities; second, to analyze the relationship between
the Coase theory of externalities with the “standard” Pigou tradition.

Dahlman notes that the term “transactions costs” as used historically
refer to “unspecified interferences with the price mechanism”[^3] but he
notes that the understanding of the idea of transactions costs is
central to the foundations of modern monetary theory. Dahlman attempts
to pin down what is meant by transactions costs in the realm of
externalities by use of example. To do this, he defines transactions
costs in three ways.

The first definition he gives is “a fixed proportion of whatever is
being traded is assumed to disappear in the transactions itself.”[^4]
Dahlman notes that this definition is no different than the idea of
transportation costs that economists use; transactions costs are the
costs associated with moving a good (service, elimination of activity)
from one person to another. Using this argument he notes that
“transportation costs and proportional transactions costs are productive
in precisely the same way that resources used up in the physical
transformation of inputs into outputs are productive”[^5] and can be
treated identically without loss of information.

Next Dahlman examines the idea of a fixed transactions cost, a more
mathematically tricky beast because of the non-convex nature of the
fixed cost. These non-convexities wreak havoc with existence and
uniqueness proofs. It has been noted though that these non-convexities,
if they are not “too big” in relation to the economy, can be ignored.
Next he observes that fixed transactions costs are similar to fixed
setup costs, but that fixed setup costs aren’t really fixed; they are
endogenously determined as a known and adjusted cost of production.

Finally the definition as put forth by Coase is examined. According to
Coase, transactions costs stem from: (i) discover who it is that one
wishes to deal with and on what terms, (ii) to conduct negotiations
(iii) to make sure the terms of the contract are upheld, etc.

“Yet, this functional taxonomy of different transactions costs is
unnecessarily elaborate: fundamentally, the three classes reduce to a
single one – for they all have one thing in common that they represent
resources lost due to lack of information.”[^6] The powerful result of
this paper is that all transactions cost, whatever their reason for
existence, can be thought about as stemming from the same thing:
imperfect information.

The economics of uncertainty implicitly assumes that the probability
distribution developed by the economic agent is in fact correct. Dahlman
doesn’t make this assumption and analyzes its implications. He notes
that there are four possibilities in a recipient-emitter with
externalities under uncertainty: (i) the recipient thinks that he can
bargain to reduction because he correctly believes that benefits
outweigh costs, (ii) the recipient thinks that he cannot bargain to
reduction because he correctly believes that costs outweigh benefits,
(iii) the recipient thinks that he can bargain to reduction because he
incorrectly believes that benefits outweigh costs, (iv) the recipient
thinks that he cannot bargain to reduction because he incorrectly
believes that costs outweigh benefits. In the first two cases no new
information can be concluded. Externalities do not exist because either
the emitter internalizes the costs (case i) or the recipient
internalizes the costs (case ii). In case iii we see that once the
recipient starts on the path of bargaining the costs associated with
that bargaining outweigh the benefits and the “bad” emitted is too low.
In case iv just the opposite happens, too much is produced because the
recipient believes that the costs would be too great when in fact they
wouldn’t be. But the conclusion Dahlman reaches is that there still
exists no externality because the recipient is using a constrained
maximization given the information he had. It can only be thought of as
an externality if the recipient should have “known better”.

Next Dahlman examines the policy implications of externalities based
upon the initial starting point, either an idealized world in which no
transactions costs exist (Model I), or a world in which transactions
costs (and therefore externalities) are present (Model II). He argues
since we live in a world with transactions costs, using Model I as a
reference point in judging welfare is wrong because we can never reach
the idealized place of Model I. Model II is more realistic in that its
optimum will be of a constrained maximization problem that is really
faced in our transactions costs world. Because of this, the
externalities that exist in our world are Pareto-irrelevant. Using this
methodology to analyze the problems of externalities leads us to a
startling conclusion: “transactions costs per se have nothing to do with
externalities. What is involved is a *value judgment*.”[^7] This is a
question of normative economics. The problem with the usual analysis is
the implicit assumption that externalities exist only if markets are
unable to do what the government can, i.e. internalize the unwanted side
effects.

In the final section of the paper Dahlman examines the Pigovian
Tax-Subsidy scheme, what he terms the “modern” treatment of
externalities and the Coase approach to externalities. He argues that
the Pigovian scheme will be optimum if we can distinguish between
emitters and recipients, which is a very big “if”. The modern treatment
of externalities because of its construction has no general proofs of
the optimality of the tax rules that it generates. In fact, he argues
that optimality is a presupposition of the modern treatment, and he
wonders what competitive equilibrium really means since the equilibrium
comprises “reasonable” standards that are universally agreed upon. Hence
“if we all agree on it, it must be optimal.”[^8] Based on his
(Dahlman’s) discussion of transactions costs, “it is obvious that
Coase’s notion of this concept is identical to what was labeled
transactions costs due to imperfect information.

Dahlman’s conclusion is that the reason for welfare decreases in the
world isn’t because of externalities, but is due to transactions costs
and imperfect information. He argues that while the Pigovian tax-subsidy
and “modern” approach both try to cure the symptom, i.e. externalities,
Coase’s approach to externalities leads us to choose institutions that
minimize both the transactions costs and imperfect information to help
mitigate externalities, not just try to get rid of them (which may be an
economically inefficient allocation of resources).

[^1]: Page 141

[^2]: Page 142

[^3]: Page 144

[^4]: Page 144

[^5]: Page 145

[^6]: Page 148

[^7]: Page 156

[^8]: Page 157
