***De Meza – Coase Theorem***

*Robert Cheley*

Is the Coase theorem “profound, trivial, a tautology, false,
revolutionary, wicked?”[^1] It has been claimed to be all of these. In
this paper De Meza critiques some of the findings of Coase in his
seminal paper ‘The Problem of Social Cost’, and in his earlier work ‘The
Federal Communications Commission’. Coase’s theorem told us to change
the way we look at problems of externalities by seeing them through the
lens of reciprocity, the idea that there are no pure victims and there
are no pure offenders.

The first half of De Meza’s paper goes over the Coase ‘theorem’ as he
calls it, calling attention to two major points often commented on about
Coase’s paper: (i) “even in the absence of transaction costs, the
unanticipated redistribution of property rights will only leave resource
allocation unchanged if there are no income effects”[^2], and (ii) “if
there are distortions elsewhere in the economy, a deal which benefits
the parties directly affected by the externalities may be harmful
overall.”[^3] Coase made a counter argument to the first point in 1988
noting that under certain circumstances in which the wealth effect will
not affect resource allocation, although he admits that the
circumstances are unlikely to occur. The second comment directly relates
to the existence of transactions costs, and will affect the bargaining
just as in a transactions costs Cosian world.

The major criticism of the Coase perspective on externalities is the
reciprocal nature of his analysis, implying that there are no victims
and no offenders. Shavell showed that taking the analysis a step further
and supposing that there are no negotiations, efficiency is achieved if
all involved must pay full damages to the court. De Meza notes three
drawbacks from this implication (though there may be many more): “(i)
the parties involved have an incentive to agree not to inform the
authorities, (ii) the number of those implicated in ‘causing’ the damage
may be very large indeed and the administrative problem of implementing
the rule gets out of hand, (iii) relative to cost sharing, the risk to
the parties is increased and given risk aversion this is a real
loss.”[^4]

De Meza’s biggest criticism by far is the oversight on Coase’s part to
not take into consideration the order in which events happened, that is
to say order matters. De Meza gives an example of a factory that can
install a pollution reduction device. He shows that depending on the
cost of the device and the assignment of property rights the factory may
or may not install the device thus leading to an outcome with may or may
not be efficient. De Meza’s conclusion on the topic of reciprocity is
that “there is an asymmetry in the way different agents should be
treated. Taking reciprocity seriously implies that the full costs of the
damage should be paid by each party.”[^5]

One of the major points of Coase’s paper is the idea of transaction
costs. De Meza argues that although Coase deals with this difficult
concept, he doesn’t take his analysis far enough. De Meza illustrates by
example the problems that can arise using a limited transactions costs
world, noting that there are cases in which “transaction costs are
positive, private property may become undesirable.”[^6]

Incomplete information may also cause a failure of the central idea of
Coase’s theorem, i.e., that regardless of initial ownership, trade will
result in an efficient allocation of resources. Using the example of a
seller of a good and a buyer that is either high type or low type with
multiple bargaining periods we see that there are cases where a
separating equilibrium will exist and the item will always be sold, but
existence of the low type buyers that will not buy in the first period
causes an inefficiency, even though the item is always sold. “The
lessons are that private bargaining may not yield a first best outcome,
that some initial allocations of rights may reduce bargaining problems
relative to others, and it is conceptually possible that by controlling
the process by which negotiation is undertaken, the state may improve
outcomes.”[^7]

De Meza concludes by noting that “even economists have probably
underplayed the extent to which trade overrides the formal provisions of
organizational structure.”[^8] His main conclusion however is that “the
allocation of property rights matters for efficiency by affecting the
*ex ante* incentive to create surplus.”[^9] If the allocation of
property rights is not done with thought then the economic agents acting
rationally may achieve inefficiencies that would otherwise not be
present.

[^1]: Page 270

[^2]: Page 273

[^3]: Page 273

[^4]: Page 273

[^5]: Page 274

[^6]: Page 274

[^7]: Page 276

[^8]: Page 280

[^9]: Page 280
