***Deacon – Deforestation and the Rule of Law in a Cross-Section of
Countries***

*Robert Cheley*

The importance of property rights and the role of ownership security
play a large role in the literature regarding deforestation. Deacon’s
paper “examines these hypotheses empirically by testing for
relationships between deforestation and the possible causes: population
pressure, growth in income, and insecure property rights.”[^1] Several
case studies have been conducted to find an economic explanation of
deforestation. Southgate, Sierra, and Brown (1991) “have examined the
effect of ownership and found that security of tenure, as measured by
the prevalence of adjudicated land claims, is negatively related to
deforestation rates.” [^2] There also exists mounting evidence that
countries experiencing rapid deforestation also lack strict enforcement
of property rights.

The model used relates the biomass in a country to a function of
environmental factors multiplicatively related to a function of
socioeconomic factors and a vector of parameters. What is troubling
about this formulation is that the environmental factors are constant
for each country. It seems unlikely that a country’s environmental
factors could be the same across the entire country, especially when
considering a country like India or Yugoslavia to name just two. This
concern isn’t specifically addressed in the article.

The author does address two problems that prevent direct estimation of
the model in levels. The first is that “the environmental factors for
individual countries are reported for only a subset of the countries for
which forest coverage data is available. Second, available data identify
only the *land area* classified as forest in each country not the forest
biomass.”[^3] The second concern can be answered with the relationship
that exists between forest biomass and forest area, i.e. where B is the
Biomass, c is the biomass per acre of forest and A is the area. These
assumptions allow the author to estimate a log differenced model, with
the difference coming from different years for each country, 1980 and
1985.The data comes from *An Interim Report on the State of Forest
Resources in the Developing Countries* which contained data on “total
forest” including both open and closed forests. A problem is encountered
though because the information available in 1980 (129 observations) than
in 1985 (84 observations). In order to overcome this problem a secondary
data source is used that contains data on “forest and woodland area”. A
model is then constructed to estimate (using OLS) the data for the
missing countries in 1985. Using this data the three hypotheses stated
earlier are examined.

Population growth has been cited as the single most important cause of
deforestation. This is because population can lead to migration to
forests by peasants for the purpose of subsistence farming. Population
growth can also lead to an increase in demand for wood fuel, which will
remove nutrient from the soil, which if intense enough can cause slow
regeneration and degradation of forest cover. What Deacon finds is that
while population growth does play a role in an increase in
deforestation, it is not an immediate effect, but rather takes time to
manifest itself. The growth rate in the years 1975-1980 show a much
higher effect on deforestation in 1980-85 than does the population
growth rate during that time period, i.e. the effect is lagged. This
result applies to both low- and high income countries.

National income growth is often identified with deforestation as an
important positive correlate. Deacon finds that quite to the contrary,
growth in income is negatively correlated with deforestation. Deacon
states that this finding invalidates the hypothesis that forest capital
consumption is part of the growth, measured income. What it may reveal,
however, that an increase in income accompanies an increased demand for
forest preservation, or alternatively may indicate the existence of a
third factor positively related to both.

Deacon claims that the measure that is related to both could be
political attributes or governmental attributes. A simple test is done,
excluding high income countries, to ascertain the relationship that
exists. It is found in 9 of 10 categories that the more unstable the
political attributes the more likely high deforestation is to occur. For
governmental attributes, it is found that the less representative the
government the higher the deforestation in four of six categories. A
simple regression was done to see the effect political attributes with
significant differences in means between high and low deforestation
countries. What was found was that current political factors in all
cases had a larger effect on the level of deforestation. The results
agree with general intuition, i.e. that “political turmoil and
repressive governments are harmful to investment.”[^4]

What Deacon has been able to show is that insecure ownership is a much
more significant cause of deforestation than is population growth or
even growth in income. The explanatory power of Deacon’s model is
relatively low, so a solid relationship is lacking, but this may be due
to missing variables or an endogeneity issue. The key point of Deacon’s
paper is that without understanding the causes of deforestation policy
makers will continue to treat the symptoms rather than the causes.

[^1]: Page 414

[^2]: Page 415

[^3]: Page 416

[^4]: Page 427
