***Demsetz – Property Rights***

*Robert Cheley*

Demsetz explores the concepts of property rights, stating that “property
rights … are the socially acceptable uses to which the holder of such
rights can put the scare resources to which these rights refer.”[^1] It
is easily seen that complete certainty about the scope of possible uses
of resources that can be allowed or disallowed can not be known from the
outset. Therefore conflict-resolving institutions, such as courts,
legislative bodies, or some other authority of the community will
inevitably be a part of the property system. A key part of Demsetz’s
paper is the delineation he makes between property rights holder and
property rights owner.

For Demsetz, ownership has many ambiguities attached to it. An owner of
a parcel of land may have the right to till the land, but not the right
to exclude others from walking across it, or mining under it, or
polluting the air or water around it. The holder of property rights to
an identical parcel of land will have exclusion rights that allow him to
keep others off his parcel, *and* to keep them from adding or
subtracting anything without his consent. We can see then that the
ownership of that parcel of land is not the same as the holder of the
property rights associated to that parcel of land.

Demsetz distinguishes between ownership of a right and ownership of an
asset. What does the ownership of the right till a parcel of land
include? What does it mean for this right to be owned? According to
Demsetz, three things assign ownership to that right: (1) the ability to
use the scarce resource (2) the ability to exclude others (3) the
ability to transfer control to other potential owners. Ownership of the
asset, however, requires two conditions (seemingly implied when we speak
of ownership of assets): (1) The owner should own a significant bundle
of rights in the asset, (2) The owner must have presumptive control of
yet unarticulated rights. We see from this distinction that the owner is
the person (or persons) “that exercises the most important subset of
exclusive, alienable, and presumptive rights.”[^2] Of course, “most
important” is context-specific; there is no generalization of this
statement.

Property rights do not exist in a vacuum. They “are created and modified
as well as exercised and exchanged.”[^3] Demsetz states that the
discovery of new inventions, land, ideas and resource use lead to the
emergence of new rights. Notice, however, that these discoveries are not
predictable events. Demsetz states that a strong systematic connection
between unpredictable events and the emergence of new rights exists. For
example, the aboriginal people of the Labrador Peninsula didn’t have
strict assignment of property rights until the fur trade. The discovery
of fur pelts value to the Europeans, by the indigenous people, lead to a
system of property rights.

The development of property rights regarding resources by societies can
be traced to the scarcity and control of the resource. A scarce resource
is more likely to have high enough benefits to offset the costs of
defining and enforcing property rights, although defining property
rights to a single owner may cause a monopoly to occur. However, the
resource being examined must also be taken into consideration when
deciding if a monopoly will form; a person or group of people assigned
the property right of the sun’s light will be unlikely to form a
monopoly at any sort of cost effective way with today’s technology.
Control of the resource must exist in order to effectively use the
right. To say that a person or group of people has the right to the
sun’s light means nothing, unless that person or group can effectively
block the sun’s light and then charge people in the market to unblock
the sun.

Once ownership rights have been established they can be truncated,
usually through the legal apparatus of the society. The types of
restrictions Demsetz explores are Price Ceiling/Floors, Permanence and
Competition. Once these restrictions are in place economic growth can be
slowed. Price ceilings/floors may allow for an under/over production of
a good, putting resources to economically inefficient uses. Permanence
can cause an indefinite monopoly over a resource. Competition, while
said to be a good thing by the court, can actually limit the
exploitation of industries with scale economies, leading to higher
prices and decreases in social welfare.

This essay illustrates how different the idea of property rights holder
is from property rights owner. Demsetz gives stylized examples to show
that holder and owner are really different. He also explores the
implications of scarcity and control on property rights, as well as the
implications of truncation of property rights.

[^1]: Page 144

[^2]: Page 146

[^3]: Page 151
