***Demsetz – Toward a Theory of Property Rights***

*Robert Cheley*

In Demsetz’s paper he states that “property rights are an instrument of
society and derive their significance from the fact that they help a man
form those expectations which he can reasonably hold in his dealing with
others. These expectations find expressions in the laws, customs, and
mores of a society.”[^1] We would therefore not expect to find an idea
of property rights on Robinson Crusoe’s island. Property rights imply
expectations that individuals can have of their community regarding the
use of an individual’s right to harm or benefit oneself or others. This
leads to a key point of Demsetz’s paper: there exists a close
relationship between property rights and externalities.

Demsetz includes “external costs, external benefits, and pecuniary as
well as nonpecuniary”[^2] in his definition of externalities. In order
to “internalize” these externalities, the participants usually need to
change the property rights regime. It must be noted however that there
exist situations in which transaction costs may be too high due to
natural difficulties in trading, or because of legal reasons.

The emergence of property rights must then be put in a framework of
externalities. When new or different effects (that are either beneficial
or harmful), property rights should emerge if the benefits of
establishment are greater than the costs. Demsetz argues that “property
rights develop to internalize externalities when the gains of
internalization become larger than the cost of internalization.”[^3]
Demsetz also notes that the emergence of new state or privately owned
property rights can occur because of changes in technology. Examples
would include the development of air rights, renters’ rights, and rules
for liability in automobile accidents.

How do property rights develop in the absence of ‘civilization’ (i.e.
western society)? Eleanor Leacock examined the property rights of
aboriginals in Canadian forests and found that although they lacked what
could be called a western style of civilization, they had indeed
developed the idea of property rights when the fur trade made its way to
them. She “clearly established the fact that a close relationship
existed, both historically and geographically, between the development
of private rights in land and the development of the commercial fur
trade. This defied conventional wisdom regarding North American
aboriginal people, specifically the plains people.

If the development of the property rights is regarding as a solution to
an externality problem, then it is easy to see why the forest aboriginal
peoples would develop property rights while plains peoples would not.
The nature of forest animals is very stationary, making the idea of
property rights easily (and therefore relatively cheaply defined) while
plains animals are more migratory making property rights definitions
much more costly.

We can therefore surmise that the fur trade had two important effects on
the forest peoples: (1) the value of the furs to the native people was
increased considerably, (2) 1 caused the increase in the scale of
hunting. These two effects caused a change in the value of the
externality, such that the lost value by not assigning property rights
was less than the value of establishing and enforcing property rights.

In order to examine the forces that will determine the right form of
ownership Demsetz next examines several idealized forms: communal,
private and state. Communal ownership will have the greatest difficulty
in coming to an agreement regarding how to deal with the externalities
that are present. This is because there is no one “owner” so that the
transaction costs associated with dealing with the externality can be
very high (perhaps infinitely high). One problem with communal property
in particular is that it can be “used up” too quickly, taking away the
usage of the land from future generations. Unfortunately, the
communication costs for speaking to future generations has yet to be
calculated, but is assumed to be high. The only way out of this problem
is for the state, courts or leaders to internalize the costs by some
means, one of which could be random distribution of land.

We can still run into problems, however, if only the only property
rights assigned are for land. If a river runs through the land, and the
owner at the beginning of the river decides to dam it off, there is
nothing to stop him, although the other land owners would be willing to
pay the owner at the beginning of the river not to dam, they would never
be able to come to an agreement (or if they did it would be very costly)
whereby each succeeding land owner on the river does not dam the river
on his property, thus adversely affecting the down stream owners. This
implies that although property rights may have thought to be fully
assigned, they were in fact not.

What we see in Demsetz’s paper is similar to what we have seen before.
Externalities will be taken care of (i.e. eliminated) if it makes
economic sense to do so. Otherwise, the externality will exist, but the
cost of eliminating wouldn’t be worth the benefit received from such
action.

[^1]: Page 347

[^2]: Page 348

[^3]: Page 350
