***Edwards – Ownership of Renewable Ocean Resources***

*Robert Cheley*

The purpose of the paper is to offer a synthesis of the property rights,
public choice and fisheries management that has already begun. The
author draws more attention to comparisons of alternative property
rights institutions. Throughout the paper, “the focus is on how property
rights institutions are likely to affect economic efficiency by
influencing the behavior of individual decision-makers.”[^1]

The author begins his argument by describing what property and property
rights are and are not, and the role of institutions play in defining
and defending the two. Bromley states that “property is a benefit (or
income) stream, and a property right is claim to the benefit stream that
some higher body – usually a government – will agree to protect through
the assignment of duty to others who may covet, or somehow interfere
with, the benefit system.”[^2] Property rights are the right to use or
not use the property which you have. The purpose of institutions is to
allocate scarce resources, and by doing so allows for efficient use of
the scarce resources. The author describes three types of ownership: (1)
state, (2) common, and (3) private, discussing them from the standpoint
of the residual claimants and the behavior that would be expected to be
seen.

It is generally accepted that open access fisheries will lead to
economic waste. The question asked is whether or not state ownership
will increase economic efficiency. State usufructuary rights in U.S.
fisheries were impractical to enforce until 1976, when the Fishery
Conservation Management Act (FCMA) was passed. This defined a property
right to fisheries which were previously open access, and had no
property rights. What was seen was the excess capital was retired
leading to more economic efficiency, though this level of efficiency is
not enough. Therefore, the author asks, “\[do\] the total opportunity
costs of state ownership and government regulation outweigh gains in the
fishery?”[^3]

The author finds that generally, because of rent-seeking and the
principal-agent problem inherent in any form of regulation the
intervention of government agencies will not offset the gains in
efficiency due to the regulations. This is because there are no clear
residual claimants, lobbyists will try to influence politicians, which
in turn cause politicians to respond to re-election pressures. The
agency losses and rent seeking costs associated with these problems will
more than offset any cost savings associated with retirement of excess
capital that would be seen in a regulated open access fishery
environment.

The author claims three conclusions can be drawn from common property
literature reviewed: (1) exclusion is essential to a common property
institution, (2) common property institutions are more able than the
state to respond to changes in the resource and (3) the costs of
monitoring and enforcing non-binding agreements among heterogeneous
claimants may preclude community management of renewable ocean resources
in open, market economies and weakens marketing cooperatives, especially
when the right to exclude is attenuated.[^4]

Knight pointed out that it is the function of private ownership to
prevent excessive investment in superior situations. Private property is
also believed to internalize the benefits and costs of an action. The
author points out that the advantages of private ownership hinges on
many “ifs” in order for it to actually work the way it is theorized to.
While many believe the transaction costs associated with privatization
of open access fisheries is too high, what the author wishes to explore
further is the “comparisons of how the imperfections affect the behavior
of the residual claimants and government stakeholders across
institutions.”[^5]

When examining the cost side of the problem, the most significant, and
most noted, barrier to the establishment of private property is the
negotiation of a large number of participants whose interests do not
coincide. This problem is exacerbated when government stakeholders are
included in the problem. The author cites the need for more empirical
research in the area of open access fisheries, especially in light of
political and technological forces, along with dynamic demand.

[^1]: Page 254

[^2]: Bromley, D.W. 1992. The commons, common property, and
    environmental policy. Environmental and Resource Economics 2:1-17

[^3]: Page 257

[^4]: Page 263

[^5]: Page 265
