***Ellickson – Of Coase and Cattle***

*Robert Cheley*

The section of Ellickson’s paper examines the animal trespass laws of
Shasta County in Northern California. In California’s early history much
of the land was used for cattle grazing and very little for farming.
This lead to a rejection of English common law that gave property rights
to farmers (by forcing the owner of the cattle to be responsible for the
damages caused by the livestock), and instead assigned it to the
cattlemen (by requiring the farmers to fence their crops).

In the beginning of California’s statehood legislation was passed that
assigned cattlemen property rights governing cattle grazing. This was
done by allowing ‘victims’ of animal trespass to recover damages only if
his lands had been protected with a ‘*lawful fence*’. The pro-cattlemen
policy caused controversy as California’s economy shifted from one of
cattle grazers to farmers. As farmers were able to exert more influence
on (i.e. lobby) the state legislature during the latter half of the
nineteenth century, they were able to have statutes enacted that changed
open-range lands to closed range lands, effectively moving the property
rights from the cattlemen to the farmers.

These moves by the legislature culminated with the Estray Act of 1915 in
which all but six counties in Northern California were declared
closed-range areas. The counties excluded from the legislation were the
sparsely populated counties of Shasta, Del Norte, Lassen, Modoc,
Siskiyou, and Trinity. In 1945 two amendments were added that dealt
specifically with Shasta County: (i) a prime agricultural area south of
Redding was not devoted chiefly to grazing, (ii) empowerment of the
Board of Supervisors of Shasta County to adopt ordinances designating
areas that were also no longer chiefly used for grazing. The result was
a patch-work of open- and closed-range areas all over Shasta County.

There are two important points that Ellickson brings up in this section
of the paper: (i) what the law has defined as the victim and the
aggressor (ii) what really happens. In closed-range areas, with few
exceptions, the animal owner is strictly liable for trespass damage to
property, contrasted with open-range areas where the owner is not
liable, even if he has been negligent with the management of his
animals. There are some exceptions to the open-range rules in Shasta
County: (i) Goat, swine and vicious dog owners are assumed to be in
open-range areas in all of Shasta County, (ii) if the livestock have
trespassed through, or over, a *lawful fence* that encloses the victim’s
premises entirely, the cattleman is strictly liable for the damages,
(iii) livestock owners are held responsible if it is found that he
intentionally causes his animals to enter the unfenced land of another.

What really happens in Shasta County doesn’t mirror what the law says
should happen. Regardless of whether the cattle is found in open- or
closed-range areas “the county Animal Control Officer (ACO) relies
primarily on mediation and warnings when responding to reports of loose
animals.”[^1] His first priority is to locate the animal’s owner and ask
him to retrieve it promptly. If this were to occur on a ranchette in an
open range area, the ACO informs the ranchette owner of the cattleman’s
rights to graze in the open range, but would also inform the livestock
owner of the benefits of taking better care of the livestock. This
results in very few impounding of cattle, or issuance of criminal
citations.

What we see here is that even though property rights have been fully
assigned by the legislature, the failure of those assignments to be
standard has caused the heterogeneous group composed of two homogeneous
sub-groups (farmers and cattlemen) to enforce their own interpretation
of the law so as to best suit their needs.

[^1]: Page 667
