***Gordon – The Economic Theory of a Common-Property Resource: The
Fishery***

*Robert Cheley*

“The chief aim of this paper is to examine the economic theory of
natural resource utilization as it pertains to the fishing
industry.”[^1] Gordon claims that the terms “conservation”, “depletion”
and “over exploitation” and the problems they describe are due to the
absence of economic rent generation. The lack of economic rent leads to
a lack of property right assignment. His paper examines the efforts by
biologists in the area of ocean fisheries, but notes that their lack of
economic training has lead to some incomplete conclusions about the
reasons behind the over- (or under-) utilization of natural resources.

Dr. Martin D. Burkenroad wrote that, “the management of fisheries is
intended for the benefit of man, not fish; therefore effect of
management on fishstocks cannot be regarded as beneficial per se.” A.G.
Huntsman noted, somewhat incidentally, the essence of the economic
optimum solution, without any recognition of its significance in his
paper “*Research on Use and Increase of Fish Stocks*” 1949. What
biologists had been studying led rise to two competing theories of fish
management. The first, propagation theory attributed to E.W.L. Holt
advances the position “that legal size limits should be established at a
level that would permit every individual of the species in question to
spawn at least once.”[^2] The second was the “thinning theory” of the
Danish biologist C.G.J. Peterson, which argues that “the fish may be too
plentiful for the available food and that thinning out the young by
fishing would enable the remainder to grow more rapidly.”[^3] Both of
these theories neglected any consideration of economic consequences.

While there have been many studies, and theories, into the biology of
the fisheries, with some biologists trying to add an economic flavor to
the studies, by the time Gordon studied the problem ho notes that “a
great deal is known about the biology of the various commercial species
but little about the economic characteristics of the fishing
industry.”[^4]

In Gordon’s analysis, several simplifying assumptions are made about the
types of fish being studies, along with assumptions on cost structures
and production functions. He first assumes that we are dealing with
demersal fish, fish which are relatively non-migratory in character. He
also assumes linear cost functions, along with a production function
that obeys the law of diminishing returns. One further assumption that
he makes, which seems questionable (except for the principal of
parsimony I suppose) is that the costs of fishing supplies are
unaffected by the amount of fishing effort. It seems reasonable that as
a fisherman exerts more effort in trying to catch fish, he wears out his
equipment faster. If each fisherman exerts more effort and each wears
out his equipment faster they will all need more equipment; this implies
an increasing relationship between the amount of fishing and marginal
costs, not a constant one.

Gordon call the greatest theoretical importance that distinguished the
fishing industry from agriculture is that in the sea “the natural
resource is not private property; hence the rent it may yield is not
capable of being appropriated by anyone.”[^5] This results in any
fishing grounds that are distinguished by their productivity to have
rent completely dissipated. A stable equilibrium will result only once
the average productivity of all possible sea grounds are equal. This
leads to the possibility that some grounds will be exploited at a
negative marginal productive level.

Gordon uses a model similar to the Ramsey-Koopman model to describe an
economy with a homogenous degree 1 production function and only
effective capital as the input. What he call the bionomic model
describes the relationship between natural factors (*a*), the depletion
coefficient (*b*), the coefficient of production (*c*) and the effort
exerted by fisherman. He finds that a positive relationship between
effort and *a*, a negative relationship between effort and *b* and an
undeterminable relationship between effort and *c*.

In the final analysis of this phenomenon, Gordon notes that there is
some truth to the conservative dictum “every body’s property is nobody’s
property.”[^6] He goes on to say that, “The wealth that is free to all
is valued by none because he who is foolhardy enough to wait for its
proper time of use will only find that it has been taken by
another.”[^7] Unless property rights can be assigned, overexploitation
of ocean fisheries will continue until the are fished out of existence.

[^1]: Page 124

[^2]: Page 127

[^3]: Page 127

[^4]: Page 125

[^5]: Page 131

[^6]: Page 135

[^7]: Page 135
