GSF – Private Property and Economic Efficiency: A Study of a Common-Pool
Resource

*Robert Cheley*

The purpose of this paper is to examine a natural experiment involving a
fishery in British Columbia which introduced private harvesting rights.
The authors “examine the implications of attenuated rights on efficiency
and the effects of different property rights characteristics on
efficiency and producer surplus of firms.”[^1] This paper helps to fill
a void left by the focus of most economists’ examination of common-pool
problems that focus on comparisons, qualitative evidence, and
descriptions to evaluate the theoretical benefits of private property.

There are many solutions to the problem associated with the common-pool.
What has been pointed out is that these problems become more difficult
to solve depending on the make-up of the participants involved. If there
is a great number of participants, or they are heterogeneous in a
certain aspect, the negotiation costs can outweigh the benefits of
arriving at an efficient solution. The authors point out that the legal
system in place can also have an effect on the solutions that can be
used. For example, fishing unions have been declared illegal in America
by the Federal Trade Commission for violating Anti-Trust laws. These
regulations can inhibit cost minimization behavior by participating
firms, and lead to a reduction in social welfare, and inefficiencies,
both on an allocative and technical level.

The fishery experienced a heavy harvesting period during the 1980s, a
time the authors call the “Derby” fishery. To counter this, regulators
kept shortening the fishing season, but the shorted season was met with
limited success. The fish that were brought to market were of a lower
quality, heavy over-investment in capital was seen by the fishermen, and
the dangers of deep-sea fishing were exacerbated by the quest of the
captains to get as much fish as quickly as possible. Other problems were
experienced as well, such as “ghost fishing”, whereby lines that were
not being monitored by fishing boats would catch fish that would never
make it to market, effectively helping the fishery to reach dangerously
low biomass levels.

In 1990 the regulators instituted an experimental process called
Individual Vessel Quotas (IVQ) to be used on a trial basis until 1992 to
asses its effectiveness. A formula was determined by which fishing boats
were granted these quotas to use as they saw fit, although trading of
the quotas was not permitted. At the end of the trial period 90% of the
quota holders involved voted to extend the program. During the trial
period the fishing season went from 6 days per vessel (1990) to 214 days
(1991) to 245 days (1993). There was a learning process associated with
the IVQ during which time the fishing boats learned where to fish for
the salmon, the right crew size to have and other variable costs
associated with a longer fishing season. In 1993 the IVQ were allowed to
be transferred on a temporary basis, although total limitations still
exist on how much any one boat is allowed to harvest. After the IVQ had
been in place for 5 years the intensity of fishing per month went from
very concentrated around the original fishing season to more evenly
distributed in the season. The program has been so successful that for
the first time, “fishers have voluntarily contributed to ongoing costs
of stock assessment undertaken by the IPHC.”[^2]

In order to evaluate the changes brought about by the implementation of
the IVQ the authors estimated technical cost, allocative and overall
economic efficiency for the vessels compared to a “best practice”
isoquant calculated with a stochastic production function. The technical
costs and allocative efficiency are calculated in which all inputs, both
fixed and variable are held at observed levels. “The efficiency measures
in the study are defined by comparing input bundles along a given ray,
defined by the observed input proportions, through the origin.”[^3]

A maximum likelihood method of estimation is used to calculate the
stochastic production frontier. All of the parameters are statistically
significant (except the intercept) at the 5 percent level. The estimated
coefficients also indicate technical inefficiencies exist, and that they
account for more than the variability of the random factors. They also
find that the increasing returns to scale are present in capital,
indicating that cost savings are available if the vessels were able to
adjust their size. It is also shown by the authors that the
implementation of the IVQ increased producer surplus by allowing the
fishers to provide a higher quality product for most of the year,
instead of a lower quality product for all of the year.

The derby fisheries experience much inefficiency because cost
minimization was not rewarded. The incentive of the captains was to get
as much fish as quickly as possible because costs normally thought of as
variable were actually fixed, giving the captain an incentive to lower
his average total cost by over fishing. Contrasting that with the
situation in which private rights had been assigned, the fishers had
every incentive to minimize costs and receive the highest possible value
from the quota allotted to them.

The privatization of the BC halibut fishery provided a natural
experiment for the authors to examine. They found that when property
rights were assigned to the fishery, the fishing vessels involved went
from overuse of the fishery, and non cost-minimizing behavior to
efficient use of the fishery resource and a cost-minimizing behavior.
The results seen here tend to indicate that ensuring exclusive property
rights will provide the correct incentive to efficiently use a resource.
However, privatizing the commons will not lead instantaneously to the
best results because of learning that must take place. Short run
efficiency may be hampered by restrictions on characteristics of the
property rights, i.e. transferability, divisibility, or duration. Long
run efficiency may be impacted by preexisting regulatory regimes that
make the first best alternative illegal. Finally, the gains seen from
privatization may not be seen just in cost efficiency and input usage,
but could also be seen in output side, in terms of product form and
revenue.

[^1]: Page 681

[^2]: Page 690

[^3]: Page 690
