***Marketable Permits: Lessons for Theory and Practice ***

*Robert Cheley*

The purpose of this paper is threefold: “first, to provide a detailed
comparative analysis of the application of marketable permits to
environmental problems; second, to analyze these programs in light of
their immediate political and institutional environment, so that
individual factors that influence the design and evolution of these
programs can be identified; and third, to provide a framework for
considering future research in the design performance of these
programs.”[^1]

Most research done regarding marketable permits has been of a normative
nature that can be separated into two subcategories – theoretical and
applied. Normative theoretical research has examined markets and permit
systems that come closest to the most efficient structures. Applied
normative research looks at the potential cost savings that are made
under different permit systems. It has been found that the theoretically
marketable permits provide the best case in a normative sense. This has
been further supported by laboratory and simulated experiments, showing
that the normative theoretical approach has the potential to make
environmental policy much more efficient.

While still in its infancy, positive research tries to examine the
actual performance of the environmental markets. What is recognized in
positive theory is that instrument choice, i.e. how is the environmental
policy enforced, is most relevant to marketable permits. While both
normative and positive theory results are elegant, they are also
simplistic and are therefore not immediately applicable in the real
world as solutions to the problems faced.

Four marketable permit programs in the United States are examined in
detail: (1) The EPA’s emissions trading program, (2) Lead Trading. (3)
Trading of Water Pollution Rights in Fox River, Wisconsin, and (4) Water
Pollution Trading Rights in Dillon reservoir, Colorado. Not only are
these examined in detail, two broad categories as they relate to the
examples are looked at: (i) Restrictions on trading and (ii)
Administrative requirements that may increase transaction costs
associated with trading.

The examination of the EPA emission trading program concludes that the
set of incentives established only vaguely resembles the market
incentives that economists embrace when discussing the market solutions
to these types of problems. The review of the lead trading found that
the little regulatory “red-tape” helped to ensure that this program was
more successful. By relying on self-monitoring and reporting by the
agencies the transaction costs associated with lead trading helped
contribute to the program’s success. Water pollution trading on Fox
River was found to be bogged down by restrictions. These restrictions
seem to have certainly limited the probability of success of the
program. The Dillon reservoir trading was found to have few of the
restrictions mentioned in Fox River, and was generally found to be more
successful. The one restriction of note on the Dillon Reservoir is the
2:1 trading ratio for what is called point/nonpoint trading. In effect,
this allows heterogeneous water polluters to trade and keep the level of
pollution at a socially acceptable level.

What has come out of this analysis is that regulatory restriction on
trading and transaction costs have affected the performance of the
regulations imposed in various areas of environmental regulation. It had
been assumed that regulators had total control over trading and
transaction costs, but this has been shown not to be the case. If the
parties involved have polarized views on the “correct” property rights
regime to be established then the regulatory regime installed can lead
to failure because the competing interests will erode any ability to
provide the correct incentive structure to lead to the establishment of
property rights. However, once the property rights are established the
only question left is a distributional one, a point the authors seem to
gloss over. As we have seen the distribution of property rights is
immaterial when transaction costs are lacking. But the very setup of the
authors includes these transaction costs.

When regulation is implemented the context of that policy change must be
considered. When a policy in implemented and doesn’t work, we do not see
a whole sale abandonment of the regulations, but an incremental change.
What must also be considered are cases where there is one or a small
number of firms, or high barriers to entry. The authors also point out
that technological limits on enforcement must also be considered. The
main point here that is “\[I\]f effective instruments, the performance
of which can be reliably anticipated, are to be chosen and designed in
the future, an expanded theory of instrument choice that encompasses
these factors must be developed.”[^2]

[^1]: Page 362

[^2]: Page 404
