***Hansen and Libecap – Small Farms, Externalities and the Dust Bowl of
the 1930s***

*Robert Cheley*

“The Dust Bowl of the 1930s was one of the most severe environmental
crises in North America in the 20^th^ century.”[^1] The paper focuses on
the large number of small farms during the Dust Bowl time period of the
1930s and how they affected the fight against the Dust Bowl. The authors
specifically focus on two causes of the Dust Bowl: (1) downwind
externalities from a farmer’s failure to shield cultivated fields, (2)
The effect of cultivation intensity associated with farm size on
observed variation in erosion severity across the Great Plains. This
paper discusses for the first time the impact that the common pool had
on creating and sustaining the Dust Bowl, and their analysis illustrates
a much more complete explanation for the beginning of the Dust Bowl.

The reasons for the Dust Bowl can be traced to the raised soil
erodibility due to drought and over cultivation in the 1930s. Erosion is
caused by three types of soil movement: (1) Suspension (very fine
topsoil), (2) Saltation and, (3) Creep. The previous types of soil
movement were not equally responsible for soil movement: Suspension
accounted for 3 to 40 percent, Saltation accounted for 50 to 80 percent
and Creep accounted for 7 to 25 percent. Annual productivity was reduced
in 1933 at an estimated rate of 15 to 25 percent. Farmers were able to
combat soil erosion with two methods: (1) strip cropping with strip
fallow and (2) wind breaks of trees of brush. Of the two methods strip
cropping was more prevalent because it built up soil moisture and
roughness, while wind breaks could actually rob the soil of moisture.
Even with these methods of erosion prevention an externality exists due
to the sand from one farm that doesn’t practice erosion prevention to a
farm that does practice erosion prevention. Many factors (Size of the
unprotected area, wind speed, soil type, soil moisture, prevalence of
erosion control) could lead to deterioration of all erosion control in
the area.

In order to combat soil erosion completely, farms needed to be much
larger than optimal (in terms of production). This problem is further
compounded by the fact that most farms in the Great Plains were smaller
than the optimal size (in terms of production) due mainly to the
Homestead Act, which limited claims (and thus farm sizes) to sizes of
160 to 320 acres. Data collected shows that 68 percent of farms in the
Great Plains were 500 acres or smaller and 26 percent were 180 acres or
smaller, leading to a checker board effect. Many small farms were
surrounding larger farms, which would increase the likelihood of
externalities from those farms that didn’t practice erosion prevention.
This obvious implication is that in order to control erosion collective
action among farmers will be necessary. However, small farmers would
realize lower benefits from strip cropping strip fallow erosion
prevention, and thus would be less likely to participate.

The authors consider the following implications in their analysis of
wind erosion: (1) Small farmers should have lower fallow shares, (2) The
greater the variation in farm size, the lower the fallow share of
cropland on all farms and (3) Lower fallow share regions should have
more intense wind erosion. Three testable implications arise out of
this: (1) Many small farms and positive transaction costs should require
formal government intervention, (2) These government interventions
should occur first in regions with the most severe wind erosion and (3)
Larger farms should be the major advocates of collective action.

Data from 263 farms in nine townships in four North Dakota counties show
a positive relationship between farm size and fallow share, confirming
the author’s hypothesis. OLS is used to estimate for each of 8 five year
periods corresponding to census data the coefficients show the expected
sign, i.e. there is a positive relationship between fallow share and
farm size, but at a decreasing rate, and a negative relationship between
fallow share and deviation in farm size (but only significant through
1940 census data). The authors also show that as average farm size
increases over time so to does the fallow share.

Although the Dust Bowl was a problem of the Great Plains, its intensity
wasn’t uniform over the Great Plains. A Wind erosion Index is estimated
for each county using both OLS and an ordered probit model. The results
from the regression show that counties that faced more severe wind
erosion were the counties with higher cultivation shares of total
farmland. Another result found is “the important effect of cultivation
intensity and farm size on the magnitude of the wind erosion damage in a
county.”[^2]

The solution to the problem of externalities faced by farmers was the
formation by the government of Soil Conservation Districts (SCD) which
provided relief (in the form of subsidies) to small farmers that
increased their fallow share. The solution of SCD was implemented in
1937, a full 7 years after the start of the Dust Bowl, due in part to
the government trying to allow voluntary participation in soil erosion
prevention programs that proved inadequate. The main proponents of the
SCD were large farmers, which is not surprising given that they bore
most of the costs of cross-farm externalities.

Hansen and Libecap are able to explain much of the reason behind the
existence of the Dust Bowl, beyond just environmental factors. What they
are able to show is that a major reason for the Dust Bowl was the
inability of small farmers to internalize their behavior regarding soil
erosion prevention, leading to disastrous consequences.

[^1]: Page 3

[^2]: Page 19
