***Hardin – Tragedy of the Commons***

*Robert Cheley*

Hardin defines a problem without a “technical solution” as one in which
the problem cannot be solved by a change in techniques of the natural
sciences. An example we are all familiar with is tic-tac-toe, which has
no winning strategy (unless we consider not playing the game a winning
strategy). Hardin’s “thesis is that the ‘population problem’ as
conventionally conceived, is a member of this class.”[^1]The power of
this statement cannot be understated. Hardin argues that many people
that are worried about the problem of population think it can be solved
through technology. However, it is clear that Hardin believes that this
is not the case. The purpose of his paper is to show that “the
population problem cannot be solved in a technical way, any more than
can the problem of winning the game of tic-tac-toe.”[^2]

A Malthusian steady-state would require that we are at a subsistence
level of existence, taking in just as much energy as we can minimally
expend, which leads to a zero growth rate. Hardin argues that the reason
for the non-zero population growth of the world is that there is a
failure of parents to fully internalize the costs of producing children.
If we replace parents with firms and children with good X, then we are
simply talking about a problem of externalities. The vital points that
Hardin seems to be missing are that the reasons for the non-zero
population growth are: (i) Incomplete assignment of property rights (ii)
Transaction costs, the two ideas central to the Coase Theorem.

The reason for incomplete information comes from the idea that we own
ourselves, and the product of our work. If we own ourselves, and can do
with them as we wish then we should be able to have as many children as
possible, but the world is not an infinite place, so do we need to take
that into account when planning a family? If the answer is yes, then
suddenly we can’t have as many children as we want, which in turn means
that we really don’t own ourselves (because we are now constrained
against our will). If the answer is no, then eventually we come to a
place where the population is so great that we are living at a
Malthusian subsistence level.

Suppose that somehow property rights were *fully assigned*, then we can
examine the problem of transaction costs. In the People’s Republic of
China this has happened. The state has decided that each family may have
one child, effectively deciding that people do not fully own themselves.
Could something like this work in the U.S.? Most people would answer no,
and each would probably have a different answer. I believe the real
reason for the non-adoption of a law like this is that the transactions
costs (i.e. policing, costs from civil unrest, etc.) associated with
implementation of the rule would be greater than any perceived benefits
gained from constraining the growth rate.

If we can fully assign property rights over child production, then
instead of using a one- (or two- or three-) child-only rule, we can
adopt a voucher rule, whereby each family is given a voucher for each
child they can have (say two). If a family decides not to have their
total allotment of children then the rights to have the child can be
sold on an open market to those family that want to have more than they
have vouchers for. In this way, families would be forced to fully
internalize the costs associated with having children.

How can we decide how many children each family is allowed to have?
Coase’s Theorem says that it doesn’t really matter, so long as property
rights are assigned and the transaction costs associated with the
problem are not so high as to keep an optimum from being reached. The
tragedy of the commons in this case is only a tragedy so long as we are
unwilling (or unable due to high transaction costs) to fully assign
property rights in the areas where religious morality may be concerned.

[^1]: Page 1243

[^2]: Page 1243
