***Heller – The Tragedy of the Anticommons: Property in the Transition
from Marx to Markets***

*Robert Cheley*

Heller is the first to point out that all of the focus on the commons
has left an important idea left unexplored, that of the anticommons. He
defines the anticommons as “multiple owners are each endowed with the
right to exclude others from a scarce resource, and no one has an
effective privilege of use.”[^1]The effect of the anticommons is to
underutilize a resource. “Once anticommons property appears, neither
markets nor subsequent regulation will reliably convert it into useful
private property, even if the property rights are ‘clearly defined’ and
contracts are subject to the ‘rule of law.’”[^2] This claim implies that
once the anticommons property has emerged, markets and governments may
find it impossible to reconstitute it into private property that can be
used.

Heller uses Moscow as an example of the problem that anticommons can
cause. The structure of the Soviet Union was hierarchical in nature,
differentiating several types of property, each with diminishing
protection of property rights. Socialist law allowed integration of
physical assets within overlapping structures of the state, linking
state owned enterprises up to the ministry assigned to that industry.
Thus, when property in the Soviet Union began to be privatized it had
indistinct boundaries and overlapping ownership rights.

Property organized under a hierarchy can lead to striking trends. Heller
argues that the property that was less successful in the transition from
a planned to market economy was the property that received the most
protection of under socialist law. He points out that residential real
estate, which received very little protection under socialist law, has
performed very well in the new market economy, while commercial law,
which received more protection, is performing poorly. In addition to
protection of property rights for commercial real estate, there were
many “owners” of the property. Once transition began, the divided
ownership caused the commercial real estate to encounter problems on
deciding usage, leaving much of it either unused or underutilized.

The tragedy of the anticommons stems from the lack of full exclusive
rights for any one owner. The real estate example shows that this was
encountered in the post-Soviet era in Eastern Europe. Is there a way
that this problem can be avoided? One possibility would be to move away
from a rapid transition of enterprise privatization. The privatization
broke up the socialist bundle of rights among a heterogeneous group:
workers, managers and local government. Each of these groups may hold
exclusivity rights that prevent any one group from being able to
restructure the assets of the corporation. This caused a move from
socialist style ownership to anticommons ownership, leading to the
underutilization of resources and a lack of restructuring of assets.

The main issue that Heller is dealing with in his article is that
government can unwittingly provide the incentives to form anticommons
ownership of property. In order to avoid this pitfall we must understand
that clearly defining property rights isn’t enough to ensure that
private property will be established. Government must be able “to convey
a core of bundle of rights to a single owner, rather than rights of
exclusion to multiple owners.”[^3] Only when a government is able to do
this can the anticommons, and the tragedies that accompany them, be
avoided.

[^1]: Page 624

[^2]: Page 688

[^3]: Page 688
