***Homans and Wilen – A Model of Regulated Open Access Resource Use***

*Robert Cheley*

The purpose of the paper is to “present a model of a regulated open
access fishery which \[they\] believe more accurately captures some of
the features of modern fisheries.”[^1] Most empirical work on fisheries
has imposed the assumption that the fishery is operating as a pure open
access conditions, when in reality most fisheries are operated as what
the authors termed *regulated* *open access*, in which the regulations
take the shape of gear restrictions, area closers, or seasonal length
restrictions. A question the authors bring us is, “Why aren’t the
regulations incorporated as technological constraints?” The answer,
argue the authors, is that regulations are fundamentally endogenous and
dynamic to the process. These observations imply: (1) Technology and
regulation in the modern fishery are fundamentally tied to one another,
(2) Gains (or losses) from policy alternatives need to be compared to
the status quo, and (3) forecasting requires a solid understanding of
both the evolution of the biomass in the fishery, but also the evolution
of the regulatory apparatus. The model developed in this paper is
predictive rather than normative, and “elevates the role of the
regulatory structure to one on par with consideration of industry
behavior and biological dynamics.”[^2]

The model developed has 3 distinct components: (1) Fishermen’s Behavior,
(2) Regulator Behavior and (3) Between Season Dynamics and the Harvest
Quota Target. The function regarding fishermen’s behavior describes the
monotonic relationship between effort and season length over the
interval in which effort occurs, i.e. for season lengths in which the
fixed costs can be covered by participating in fishing. The regulator
behavior seeks to find the optimal amount of time to set for the season
length, which will depend on the initial biomass, effort expended by
fishermen, quota chosen, and a catchability parameter. These two
equations will give the equilibrium effort and season length by their
intersection (as in Figure 3). The between season dynamics are assumed
to be governed by a hybrid of the Schaefer and Beverton-Holt models.
This dynamic process, coupled with a linear exploitation rule regulators
will allow a fraction of the initial biomass to be taken each season,
and will thus be able to set a target quota to keep the biomass above
the safe level. This implies that since the equilibrium biomass is a
function of the regulatory parameters the notion of a safe biomass is
equivalent to a choice of the exploitation rule parameters.

The comparative statics of the model give intuitive results, for example
as the price increases the effort will increase, while the season length
will decrease. The only parameters for which the comparative statics can
not be signed are the regulatory parameters, that is to say changes in
these parameters does not guarantee a definite change in effort, season
length, biomass level or quota.

The mode is applied to fisheries North Pacific Halibut fisheries from
1935-1977. Equations from the model are modified to include an error
term with some distribution. The biomass equations are estimated with
ordinary least squares (OLS), while the capacity level and season length
are determined simultaneously estimated with non-linear three-stage
least-squares. Since the time period includes the disruptive period of
World War II a dummy variable is included in the season length equation.

The fisheries examined are broken into 3 different areas; the authors
examine areas two and three. The estimated coefficients for the two
areas are consistent with the theory presented in the paper and
generally significant. Hansen’s test for over identifying restrictions
shows that the model is not misspecified. Another point made by the
authors is that the magnitude of the estimates are in-line with
expectations. It is also noted that the differences between areas two
and three are in agreement with what should be expected, given that area
three is more remote and thus more costly to fish in.

The key point that the paper points out is that the structure of the
regulator is important when examining open access issues. The regulated
model postulated by the authors point to and explain several interesting
facts about modern fisheries: (1) regulated fisheries attract more
redundant capital that predicted by Gordon’s model, (2) over the long
run more capacity is attracted and regulations are tightened, and (3)
the direct effects of the regulatory process are to draw in more
capacity that the Gordon model would suggest, but will be offset
somewhat by the indirect effects of regulations on the market.

[^1]: Page 2

[^2]: Page 3
