***Johnson and Libecap – Contracting Problems and Regulation: The Case
of the Fishery***

*Robert Cheley*

The common-pool problems facing the fishery are well known. According to
Gordon all that is required is a contract between the parties involved
and rent dissipated converges to zero. Johnson and Libecap claim that
the reason for the lack of contracts is due to the heterogeneity of
fisherman with respect to ability to catch fish. If these
heterogeneities are high enough, the transaction costs associated with
forming a contract are too high and rent dissipation will continue.
Political constraints are also an issue for the fishermen, as any sort
of collective that is formed is subject to the Sherman Anti-trust Act,
which does not allow a solution in that manner. Johnson and Libecap
examine several Texas fisheries to explain try to explain fully why the
common-pool problem is so difficult to solve in this setting by first
constructing a theoretical model and then testing it empirically.

“Models of fishery exploitation generally begin by noting that property
rights to the resource stock are absent.”[^1] The establishment of
monopoly control over fisheries is soundly rejected in favor of
government ownership with free access to all citizens, is the main cause
of the common-pool problems associated with the fishery. Even though
formal property rights are not assigned to fisheries, fishermen in Texas
have tried to use informal, non-binding contracting to eliminate the
common-pool problem, which have meet with limited success. Two broad
attempts were made to deal with the problem: Informal contracts, and
Fishermen Unions. Both were found to violate anti-trust laws, the first
finding that the participants were attempting to control production
through agreement, and the second found that the participants were
attempting to exclude non-members from fishing.

Standard analyses of fisheries assume homogeneity among fishermen with
respect to ability to catch. What this fails to realize is that
fishermen are typically heterogeneous in their ability to catch fish and
therefore the solution from an assumption of homogeneity will be very
costly to implement and to enforce. The sample examined by Johnson and
Libecap has properties consistent with differing ability to catch fish,
i.e. there is a statistically significant evidence to support this
hypothesis. When heterogeneity is introduced into Gordon’s model, an
immediate implication is that a direct relationship exists between catch
and aggregate effort.

The authors assume that there are two different types of fisherman and
examine the effect of quotas on rents. From figure 1 the authors derive
the result that the efficient level of fishing is the highest level that
the fishermen involved do not differ. What we see is that the net gain
in rents for the better fishermen could be negative if quotas are
implemented, an outcome that wouldn’t be supported by the fishermen. The
main problem with the quota system is that quotas have the effect of
assigning wealth, which is costly to determine (contract to) and
enforce. An alternative to the quota system is a tax on the fishermen,
but as noted by the authors this has even less of a chance of being
supported because it would lower rents for the parties seeking the tax,
an odd result indeed.

Season closures, total allowable catch per fleet, and controls on entry
are other regulatory regimes attempted to solve the fishery problem,
though they are often criticized because of the limited scope of rent
dissipation control. Another solution could be transferable rights, but
as pointed out by the authors this can lead to disputes. The example
given in the paper shows that a party not involved in the transfer
(group 2) can be adversely affected by the transfer (between group 1 and
3) even though they have no say in the agreed to transfer of fishing
rights. There are inherent hazards involved with quota assignments,
taxes, and limited entry with transferable licenses. If the enforcement
costs are comparable, and government action is out of their control, the
fishermen will prefer to be regulated by a union or trade association,
but these solutions have been deemed illegal, so government regulation
is all that can occur. Since the political process is the only way to
solve the problem and politicians are wary of imposing controversial
allocative schemes, while fishermen are more likely to support
arrangements that do not affect the status quo the interests of the
fishermen and politicians are similar. Therefore we would expect the
regulatory solutions sought by fishermen to be very close to the
solutions provided by the government.

The empirical evidence examined looks at: (1) Limited Entry, (2) Season
Closures, Gear Restrictions and Minimum Shrimp Size and (3) Taxes, etc.
What is found is that limited entry is not present on any of the
fisheries examined, due most likely to the uncertainty regarding who
would be excluded, who entry limits change, and rules regarding
transferability. Restrictions involving season, gear and shrimp size are
seen to exist in the fisheries examined, though they are not strictly
enforced until the 1970s when depressed conditions hit the Gulf leading
to political pressure to increase enforcement. The empirical evidence
regarding rent redistribution and reduction are consistent with the
theory: “regulations that expand total catch and are not aimed at
redistributing rents have been supported by both fishermen and the
regulatory agency.”[^2]

What the authors have shown is that because normal solutions to the
fishery problem have been deemed illegal, government regulation is the
only option. They have also shown that they theory developed is
consistent with empirical evidence. They emphasize the hazards facing
heterogeneous fishermen from quotas, taxes and transferable licenses.
The key point though is not that this analysis applies only to the
fishery, but to other aspects of the economy where heterogeneous agents
are trying to agree to a contract.

[^1]: Page 1006

[^2]: Page 1019
