***Johnson and Libecap – Efficient Markets and Great Lakes Timber***

*Robert Cheley*

The findings of Johnson and Libecap lead to a major revision of
literature regarding late 19^th^- and early 20^th^-century forest
resource use. Until their study conservationists claimed that overuse of
the forested areas, specifically around the Great Lakes, was due to a
lack of foresight by loggers who incorrectly believed that the forests
were inexhaustible. What we see in this paper is that once property
rights were fully assigned, loggers internalized the costs of logging
and lead to an economically efficient use of the trees (which may or may
not match up with the sustainable growth outcome). This paper
specifically examines the nature of property rights to lumber and a time
series of prices to see if any shocks occur in timber prices.

“Until 1889 at least, the Federal Government supported the establishment
of private property rights to timberland in the Lake States through
allocations for surveys and unrestricted cash and scrip sales.”[^1] By
that time nearly all of the land was in private hands and decisions to
obtain title to land was an individual one. With property rights fully
assigned the decision to start logging would be affected by the market
value of land containing lumber and enforcement costs. Once the net
benefits of obtaining title were positive, individuals would begin to
secure titles. Figure 1 shows that until 1854 there was little increase
in the number of acres land under harvest, but after 1854 title for land
rose rapidly, due in part to an increases in timberland competition,
Government enforcement and development of capital intensive logging
techniques. Not surprisingly, the distribution of claimed lands follows
a pattern that is sequential, i.e. land closer to established centers
was titled first.

“Both figure 1 and Great Lakes forestry studies by Larson (1949), Fries
(1951), and Gates (1965) indicate that property rights were well
established in most areas well before major harvesting began.”[^2]
Another result that Fries finds is that with the decline in timber
stocks some lumber companies would withdraw stands from production in
anticipation of higher forecasted future prices to help maximize present
value profits. Withholding of lumber and a clear establishment of
property rights implies that there existed an awareness of the effect on
prices of resource scarcity by loggers. As soon as property rights could
be established in the South and West, loggers extended their activity to
those regions. This can clearly be seen by the following statistics: “In
1889 when the Lake States were at their peak, they accounted for 37% of
total U.S. production with the South and the Pacific Northwest
responsible for 14 and 6% respectively. By 1904 those percentages had
changed to 19% for the Lake States, 31% for the South and 10% for the
Pacific Northwest.”[^3]

The remainder of the paper focuses on whether lumber and stumpage prices
reveal significant shocks or price adjustments to new information on a
longer-term horizon. They start with the standard model of resource
depletion which argue that with full information regarding future
resource supplies, market demand, and production costs the rental value
of homogeneous nonrenewable resources will rise at the rate of interest,
i.e. , where r is the rate of interest, P are prices at time t and time
t+1.

A collection of timber prices from 1870 to 1932 show no major shocks
indicative of an unexpected timber shortage. The only pressure that can
be seen is from a general increase in demand in 1906-07, while
perturbations from 1915 – 1921 were most likely caused by the war in
Europe. Data in Table 1 are consistent with the concept of efficient
markets, showing an average rate of return on timber at about 6%, until
1910 which was caused by a rapid and continuing decrease in quality of
timber after that year. As a further test of the hypothesis stumpage
prices of 1890 to 1934 from Western Washington old growth are used.
Several diagnostic checks were used and found that autocorrelation was
not a factor, showing that stumpage prices are characterized by a
random-walk model with a positive drift term, a result consistent with
the efficient market hypothesis.

The series is examined for the period 1890-1934 to examine stumpage
prices further. If a sudden realization of a timber shortage had
occurred there should be a sudden increase in returns for some
one-period return. Also, if the theory of resource depletion is correct
a rise in stumpage prices should be associated with a fall in lumber
production. What Johnson and Libecap get in their time series are two
spikes, one in 1906-07 and the other in 1920-21. The first has been seen
addressed as due to an increase in general demand. The second is due to
deflation of the wholesale price index, which took one of its sharpest
declines in history during 1920-21.

What Johnson and Libecap show is that “the historical record clearly
counters the allegations that lumberman harvested in ignorance of actual
timber supplies.” [^4] What we see is that with declining resources in
the Great Lakes states, lumbermen expanded their operations to the South
and Pacific Northwest. Johnson and Libecap are also able to show that
the average nominal rate of return of timber companies during the period
1890-1934 was only 4.3%, which is comparable to railroad bonds available
(i.e. the market return) during the same time. Both of these refute the
claims that lumbermen treated forest resources as infinite stock
resources.

[^1]: Page 374

[^2]: Page 375

[^3]: Page 377

[^4]: Page 377
