***Joskow and Schmalensee – The Political Economy of Market-Based
environmental Policy: The U.S. Acid Rain Program***

*Robert Cheley*

Although market-based solutions to environmental externalities offer an
attractive alternative to the command and control solutions used most
often, these approaches are rarely used. The authors examine the
influence by the executive branch and various special interests on the
Congress in determining the distribution of sulfur dioxide allowances
among pollution producing electricity producers. This examination fills
a gap left in the current literature regarding this field of
investigation. The authors point out that very little notice has been
given to the rent-seeking behavior of interest group has affected the
distribution of tradable permits regarding sulfur dioxide.

The authors describe the acid rain program and the historical
development of the legislation through the 1970s up to the Clean Air Act
Amendments of 1990. Title IV of the CAAA, referred to by the authors as
the ‘acid rain law’ “focuses on aggregate emission levels rather than
individual sources, deals with the emissions of sulfur dioxide rather
than emission rates, places an aggregate cap on sulfur dioxide
emissions, and gives polluters extensive flexibility in choosing whether
and how to reduce emissions at specific sources.”[^1] This was radically
different from what had previously been done with the Clean Air Act of
1977.

Acid Rain grew in political prominence due to pressure from
environmental groups, Northeastern states and Canada, particularly
provinces in the southeast of Canada. Ironically, this was aided by the
Regan Administrations uncompromising position on environmental issues.
During the 1980s Midwest and Appalachian states generally opposed any
new legislation regarding acid rain controls, via sulfur dioxide limits,
while Western and Northeastern states supported a variety of legislative
tools, including a national electricity tax and more stringent scrubbing
requirements. With the end of the Regan presidency, President Bush’s
administration proposed legislation that would offer solutions to the
problems ignored by the previous administration, particularly market
based solutions to the problem.

What the authors point out is that while the proposed legislation
offered by the administration was taken into consideration, the biggest
influencing factor on the adoption of the new acid rain legislation had
to do with the origin of the Senators that were in control of the
committees who had jurisdiction over the regulation being discussed.
When the legislation was first considered what we see is a basic rule
regarding sulfur dioxide emissions, but with that came bonuses. As can
be seen from Table 2, the bonuses regarding Phase I are concentrated in
the states whose congressmen were on the committees involved with the
legislation, with Ohio, Indiana and Illinois getting the biggest
windfall from the legislation. Certain Phase II utilities were given
special treatment, as can be seen in Table 3.

To examine the effects that the legislation had on the behavior of the
Phase II participating firms, four benchmark cases are considered: (1)
Proportional Reduction, (2) Simple Rule, (3) Base Case and (4) Cost
Minimization (a detailed description is in Table 4). These different
cases allowed the authors to see the effects of the legislation on
different parties in different ways, since getting at the actual
underlying effects would be difficult to impossible given the data at
hand. This also allows the authors to get at the implied initial
allocations under the CAAA without the special provisions. Table 5 shows
us that the legislation does in fact treat different types of producers
differently. The authors also examine the effect by state and find that
states that do well in one phase do poorly in the other, with notable
exceptions being Ohio, Indiana and Illinois.

Since the actual committee meetings regarding the acid rain law were
held behind closed doors, the authors postulate hypothetical votes.
“Table 7 supports the notion that the Phase II allowance allocation
provisions were crafted with sufficient (implicit or explicit) concern
for their viability on the floors of both chambers to make them no less
attractive than at least some obvious alternatives.”[^2]

In the final analysis the authors provide four tentative conclusions:
(1) There does not appear to be any simple, structural theory of
distributive politics that is well supported by the data, (2) There is
evidence that ‘dirty’ states did relatively poorly in Phase II allowance
allocation game, all else constant, (3) There is strong evidence to
support the hypothesis that states with political clout did well in
Phase II, and weak evidence to support that they did well in Phase I,
all else equal; and (4) There is strong evidence that states that did
well relative to the authors Phase I benchmark, holding dirtiness and
clout constant, also did well in Phase II.

What the authors provide here “is an excellent example of interest group
politics mediated through legislative and regulatory processes.” [^3]
What we can learn from this is that politics plays a great role in
determining environmental policy. The more that we can understand that,
the better we can understand the costs associated with that policy, and
an effort to minimize costs can begin.

[^1]: Page 41

[^2]: Page 70

[^3]: Page 80
