***Joskow, Schmalensee and Bailey – The Market for Sulfur Dioxide
Emissions***

*Robert Cheley*

It has long been argues by economists that a tradable permit approach to
pollution control could have a significant effect in lowering costs than
the command-and-control mechanism traditionally used. The Clean Air
Amendment Act (1990) allowed trading of pollution permits. Specifically
Title IV focused on control of emissions of sulfur dioxide produced by
coal and oil electric producers. This law creates a de facto property
rights regime regarding ownership of air quality by allowing power
companies to trade “allowances” amongst each other for production of
sulfur dioxide. The purpose of this paper is to analyze the development
of the market for sulfur dioxide allowances since the enactment of the
CAAA, and examine the validity of the efficient market hypothesis as it
applies to these tradable allowances over time.

Title IV allows annual aggregated caps on sulfur dioxide emissions on a
national level from certain electrical generating facilities, specified
in the statute. These caps defined the number of allowances issued for
use in each year. The act requires that each “affected source” as they
are called, to have sulfur dioxide monitoring equipment to check
emissions. Those emissions are then reported to the EPA at the end of
each year. The affected party must have enough allowances to cover their
sulfur dioxide production for the year, or face stiff penalties and
legal action.

The act was implemented in two phases, over which time nearly all of
coal and oil electrical producers were included. The statue included
within it initial allocations of allowances to be used by the producers.
It also created a small revenue-neutral auction to encourage a market to
form. These auctions provide spot markets, and “futures” markets, e.g.
six- and seven-year markets, to purchase allowances for the current
year, or allowances for six or seven years from current. The auctions
offered by the EPA also allowed private parties to participate.

The CAAA is interpreted by the EPA as allowing a discriminatory auction,
whereby the seller with the lowest reservation price sells to the buyer
with the highest bid; the seller with the second-lowest reservation
price sells to the buyer with the second-highest bid, and so on until a
bidder’s price is below the lowest reservation price. This is contrasted
with an auction with a market clearing price that everyone pays the same
price. Some studies have predicted that this would give a downward bias
in price due to the private participation in the EPA’s auctions. This
can be checked by noting that “we can potentially learn about the
development of the market as a while from evidence on the evolution of
bidding behavior in the EPA auctions and how it changes in response to
the evolution of other trading options.”[^1]

Allowance prices for the first phase were projected to sell for
\$250-\$350 range, while second phase allowances were projected to sell
for \$500-\$700. These prices were no where near what the actual spot
market produced, with prices from \$63-\$104 for allowances. The reasons
for huge disparity in projected and actual has much to do with
information, or lack of it. As is seen in the paper, with more
information, prices actually began to decline. The reason that
information is so spotty in the beginning is that there are not
sufficient incentives to produce a ‘market’. Before the first spot
market very little is known about how these allowances will be used, and
what a fair price for them is. But, after two auctions, and three
exchanges that track the prices paid bilaterally for the allowances, a
‘market; develops and allows all of the information to be included in
the price of the allowances.

Using data from the EPA auctions, the authors construct supply and
demand graphs. What they see is that in March of 1993 considerable
dispersion in prices occurs. Thus, a significant volume of the
allowances sold at prices much higher than the market clearing price. As
time progresses we see the buyers offer curves becoming flatter and
flatter, with few allowances being traded above the market-clearing
price. Table 2 shows numerically that spread in winning bids decreases
over time. This means that over time the participants had a better idea
what the value of the allowances actually was. Indeed, “it would be hard
to argue that bidders in the 1993 auctions had a good idea of a single
market-clearing price in an efficient market.”[^2]

The downward bias in the prices created by the inclusion of private
parties in the auction that has been noted by some authors as a
possibility can see to not be plying out in Table 3. Only 2610 out of
the nearly one million allowances have been sold in the by private
parties in the EPA auctions. What seems to be happening here is that
instead of the prices being biased downward, they are in fact being
biased upward in the auction.

The introduction of Title IV to the CAAA has allowed a decrease in
transaction costs, and the emergence of a market to facilitate the trade
of pollution allowances. The evidence presented in the paper suggests
that tradable emissions rights could help solve some the problems facing
policy makers in regards to air pollution control. By assigning de facto
property rights to the air, and allowing trade to take place a market
solution has occurred that will potentially decrease the acid rain
caused by excessive amounts of sulfur dioxide in the atmosphere.

[^1]: Page 673

[^2]: Page 681
