***Knight – Some Fallacies of the Interpretation of Social Cost***

*Robert Cheley*

The main purpose of Knight’s paper is to comment and critique the
efforts, done separately, by Graham in two articles published in 1923
and Pigou in his book “Economics of Welfare”, on the idea that profit
seeking leads to an excessive investment of resources in industries of
increasing cost. They claim that by allocating some or all of the
resources from the increasing cost industry to constant or decreasing
cost industries would lead to an increase in production. Knight argues
that it is the misinterpretation by Graham of the relationship between
social cost and entrepreneur’s cost that leads them to their fallacious
results; Pigou’s error comes from his failure to assign ownership.

Knight first examines an example used by Pigou, i.e. his road example in
detail, and then illustrates with an example of his own involving a farm
of superior quality and a farm of marginal quality. Knight applies the
logic Pigou used in his road example to the farm example, leading to the
counterintuitive conclusion that total product can be increased by
transferring some or all labor and capital from the superior farm to the
marginal farm, which he claims will happen, but only if no one owns the
farm of superior quality. Knight claims that “it is in fact the social
function of ownership to prevent this excessive investment in superior
situations.” [^1]

In Pigou’s book, he mistakenly assumes that the profit-maximizing
production level (when a monopoly is not possible) is where price is
equal to the product per unit. Knight shows that it should be the case
that a profit-maximizing firm will set price equal to marginal cost,
“and thus maximizes productivity on the whole”[^2], a very important
result indeed in modern theory of the firm.

Next, Knight examines the result by Graham regarding his “ingenious
argument to prove that the classical theory of comparative cost as a
demonstration of economic advantages of trade between nations is all
wrong.”[^3] First, Knight notes that valuation can not live in a vacuum;
it is a relational concept that means nothing without having two or more
objects to compare. Next, he comments on cost noting that “the essential
thing is that that the pleasure-pain character of a value is irrelevant,
that the universal meaning of the cost is the sacrifice of a
value-alternative.”[^4] Using these two ideas Knight shows that
increasing costs are the norm, while decreasing costs are short term
phenomenon at best, and aberrant at worst, in a perfectly competitive
setting. Finally, he notes that “under competition, transferable
resources are distributed among alternatives used in such a way as to
yield equal marginal value product everywhere, which is the arrangement
that maximizes production, as measured by value, on the whole.”[^5]

In the final section, Knight examines Graham’s numerical example to find
flaws. Graham’s example is one with two countries and two industries.
Graham assumes that one country (A) has a comparative advantage in the
increasing costs industry (α), while the other country (B) has a
comparative advantage in the decreasing costs industry (β). Country A
will specialize in industry α and country B will specializes in industry
β. As this happens, Graham argues that cost for both commodities is
decreased for country B and increased for country A. Thus country A will
begin to lose; but from the assumptions of Knight’s article, the trading
process will go on forever. Knight argues that the reason this happens
is because decreasing costs can not be a permanent condition. Therefore
the costs of the two industries must converge, or the country with the
higher costs will simply “drop out” of the trade because the costs
become too high to produce the commodity that it has a comparative
advantage in.

Knight points out that the main reason for Graham’s fallacious reasoning
has to do with the assumptions he makes on costs; Knight notes that “He
(Graham) nowhere gives an explicit statement of what he means by cost,
and must be suspected of not having clearly faced the difficulties and
ambiguities in the notion …”[^6]

[^1]: Page 586

[^2]: Page 591

[^3]: Page 582

[^4]: Page 593

[^5]: Page 598

[^6]: Page 601
