***Contractual Responses to the Common Pool: Prorationing of Crude Oil
Production***

*Robert Cheley*

“Overproduction is like the weather, everyone talks about it, but no one
has ever really done anything about it.”[^1] The purpose of this paper
is to examine the differences in oil fields in Texas and Oklahoma from
19926-1935 that lead to the different bargaining solutions used. The
authors examine the effect of concentration (measured as the inverse
Herfindahl and the absolute number of firms) on the likelihood of firms
reaching a contract. Three contractual solutions considered are: (1)
Lease Consolidation, (2) Unitization, and (3) Prorationing of field
output. What they authors find, in general, is that Prorationing emerges
as the dominant solution.

Oil fields exhibit classic common pool problems. Typically, a single
reservoir of oil will be found under several independently owned surface
tracts. Because of US mineral laws of the right of first possession,
firms that engage in extraction of oil will only “own” the oil once it
is in their storage containers. Because of this, firms tend to over
extract the oil resource from the field. This causes problems because as
the oil is extracted, pressure, which is vital to retrieve the oil, is
lost, making extraction much more difficult and costly. Over extraction
is especially more likely given the competitive nature of the oil firms
operating on the tracts above the oil field. The authors show (in Table
1) that concentration of ownership on the oil fields examined. What the
Table illustrates is that there is “lower concentration of surface
ownership generally leads to lower concentration of operating
firms.”[^2] This relationship is not sensitive the stage of development
that the field is in.

As stated previously, there were three possible contracting options
available to the participating firms, yet only one of these is seen
empirically. The reason for this is that the informational costs
associated with Lease Consolidation and Unitization were too high. The
participating firms could not come to an agreement about what the actual
value was of the leases they held, thus inhibiting their ability to form
contracts. Prorationing allowed informational asymmetries to dissipate
over time because of the automatic adjustments of the contracts allowing
new information from the production process to be considered.

A Cournot-type model is developed. There are four testable implications
from this model: (1) “Greater concentration of operating firms on a
field will lead to more rapid and complete agreements … (2) per well
allocations will be used on unconcentrated fields, while on concentrated
fields acreage quotas will lead be used … (3) per well quotas will lead
small firms to drill more densely than large firms to increase their
share of field production, \[and\] (4) small firms are more likely to
violate prorationing quotas.

The empirical results show that “the most important feature in the
success or failure of contracting was the degree of concentration on
each field; other factors were not systematically related with the
bargaining outcomes.”[^3] What the authors also find is that firm size
is positively related with the support for prorationing, just as the
theory indicates. For example the large fields in Oklahoma were much
more supportive of self –regulated prorationing plans that were the
smaller independent oil fields on Texas. While small firms were not in
favor of prorationing, they were in favor of well quotas because they
can over produce and maximize their profits without the prorationing
constraint.

What the authors have shown in this paper is that because of high
bargaining costs, contracts that would have lead to more socially
efficient outcomes were not used. Instead, prorationing was used, with
variable success, due to the size of the firms involved. The key point
that the authors find, however, is that regulatory ignorance of the
heterogeneity of firms can lead to regulations that are antithetical to
what private contracts could provide to solve rent dissipation issues.

[^1]: Oil Weekly, May 20, 1927

[^2]: Page 89

[^3]: Page 94
