***Libecap and Smith – The Economic Evolution of Petroleum Property
Rights in the United States***

*Robert Cheley*

In 1967 Harold Demsetz developed an idea of property rights that posits
that they are derived from changes in the relative prices of goods and
the technologies that are used to produce them. Unitization has been
recognized as an effective way to reduce the losses associated with the
common pool extraction, but the actual implementation has been shown to
be very difficult. Demsetz noted that transaction costs can be large
relative to the gains because of ‘natural’ difficulties, trading
difficulties, or because of legal reasons. What Libecap and Smith find
is that “the development of property rights in oil and gas reservoirs
encountered all three problems: “natural” difficulties because of
geological conditions, difficulties in trading because of volatile
relative prices and asymmetric information, and regulatory-imposed
difficulties.”[^1] The purpose of this paper is to apply Demsetz’s
thesis to the evolution of regulation and property rights as they relate
to the extraction of petroleum and natural gas from common pools in the
U.S. oil fields as changes in technology, relative prices and knowledge
occurred.

Four distinct property rights regimes regarding petroleum existed in the
U.S.: (1) Extractive Anarchy, (2) Conservative Regulation, (3) Buy-Outs
and (4) Unitization. Because of the lack of understanding of the
externalities present in oil drilling adjacent property owners beginning
in 1859 didn’t realize that a coordination problem even existed. What
came about because of this was extractive anarchy; “\[E\]very surface
owner had the right to vigorously extract oil and gas to reduce it to
his possession without violating the rights of neighboring surface
owners.”[^2] This conditioned persisted initially not because of a lack
of value of the oil, but because of insufficient technological knowledge
to realize that a problem existed. This stimulated research into the
workings of the oil reserves and lead to more economical recovery of oil
and gas.

Because of the increase in research regarding the mechanics of the oil
fields, a better understanding lead to an ability by surface owners to
engage in negotiations to help reduce the externalities present. What we
should expect to see is that either through buy-outs or cooperative
restraint as solutions to the externalities created by the common pool;
because of the high transaction costs associated with the bargaining
solutions described neither of these solutions is used. New discoveries
of oil fields in Texas and Oklahoma lead to regulation by the state
regarding the number of wells that could be drilled and the amount of
extraction that could take place. State regulation in the form of the
Texas Railroad Commission, and other state agencies set monthly
production levels, allocating among the regulated wells. These per-well
quotas were themselves property rights. Although waste was encouraged
with this arrangement, it became a common feature of state regulation,
reflecting the political clout of the numerous small well producers in
Texas.

As reliance on secondary recovery techniques became more cost effective
in the 1940s and early 1950s unitization increased in popularity as a
response to the common pool problem. Because of the large numbers
problems seen previously, state government intervention was required in
order to promote unitization. States adopted “unitization assistance”
laws and provided anti-trust exemptions, while also giving majority
owners rights to impose cooperation on minority hold-out owners. In
order to succeed, unitization requires that each owner is awarded a
fixed share of all production and costs. What occurred was a deviation
from this optimal form, which lead to major problems. If a reservoir
contained both oil and gas it would be partitioned in separate
participating areas (PAs). What we find is that the while the oil costs
and production were fixed and the gas costs and production were fixed,
the deviation for any owner for oil and gas was significant, leading to
a failure to completely internalize the production externality.

Even though the potential for conflict existed, the “dual PA unit
contracts were written because of inherent difficulty in trading the
newly created unit property rights to *in situ* oil and gas.”[^3] This
conflict can exist even if owners hold identical expectation of
valuations of oil and gas. This is due to the intrinsic volatility of
the relative prices of oil and gas, and the risk-aversion of the parties
involved. This implies that there is no assurance that any of the
parties involved will lean toward unitization. This phenomenon is
especially complicated by the recent increase in volatility of relative
prices of oil and gas, as seen in Figure 3.

Because of the problems associated with negotiating private unitization
agreements state governments would resort to compulsory unitization.
Demsetz notes that this can cause transaction costs to be infinite, and
lead to inefficiencies. This can happen only if compulsory unitization
overrides a voluntary agreement created taking into account anticipated
costs and benefits. This leads to a paradox: “while actually invoking
the power of compulsory unitization can lead to inefficiency, the threat
of invoking that power may reduce bargaining costs if it mitigates the
holdout problem. But for the threat to be effective, it has to be
credible, which requires the state to follow through with compulsory
unitization at least in some cases.”[^4]

Libecap and Smith follow the development of property rights regarding
oil and gas deposits in subsurface reservoirs. Although they find a
pattern that generally agrees with Demsetz, they are able to show that
the changes of institutional factors are effected by political concerns
that are not always accounted for when computing costs and balances and
trying to balance the two. They also show that the level of prices is
not the only driving factor in the development of property rights, but
that the volatility of prices is also a concern.

[^1]: Page 3

[^2]: Page 4

[^3]: Page 13

[^4]: Page 24
