***Libecap and Wiggins – The Influence of Private Contractual Failure on
Regulation: The Case of Oil Field Unitization***

*Robert Cheley*

The article by Libecap and Wiggins “examines the link between private
contracting and regulation from another direction. It analyzes the
interdependence between regulatory responses and a breakdown in private
contracting.”[^1] Specifically they examine three unitization regulation
regimes in Oklahoma, Texas and Wyoming, in which Oklahoma and Texas were
regulated by state agencies and Wyoming was regulated by a federal
agency. What they find is that the federal policy in Wyoming is the most
effective in promoting unitization because it is encouraged before
exploration occurs, rather than in the post-developmental stage. Libecap
and Wiggins argue that the reasons for the differences seen in the three
jurisdictions are due to the differences in the number and political
strength of the firms involved.

Crude oil production displays the classic common-property conditions,
due to dispersed ownership of surface landowners, U.S. policy regarding
mineral rights and the standard rule of capture regarding those mineral
rights. A solution to this problem is unitization, a process by which
production rights are delegated to a single firm, with net revenues
split between all involved parties. Unitization can lead to an increase
in production in oil fields, but the effects of unitization are also
important for dissolved gas and gas condensate fields, a common
occurrence in the three states examined. However, complete field
unitization is not guaranteed, and generally not even seen in Texas,
where we see smaller subunits form.

The basic problem in agreeing to a unitization contract is deciding on
distributional issues such as who receives how much of the benefits and
who pays how much of the costs. Generally these unitization agreements
call for ‘once-and-for-all’ unit shares. These can be problematic
because prices of oil and gas are volatile, which would give incentive
for the firms to either break the agreement or else to not enter the
agreement in the first place.

Preunitization lease values are one of the determining factors in unit
shares for a firm, but asymmetric information can inhibit consensus on
the estimates of these values. What the authors find is that the
information available is determined by the stage of production in which
the contracting takes place. Other factors include “objective variables
such as the number of wells, current and past production as well as
subjective geological variables, including the amount of oil below lease
lines, net oil migration, oil viscosity permeability of the surrounding
medium, and subsurface pressure also influence the value of the lease.
On top of these static and dynamic factors regarding lease values, the
parties (firms) involved have proprietary information that will affect
value estimates.

All of these idiosyncratic informational issues cause the transaction
costs associated with negotiating to be very high, and thus the firms
involved will be less likely to engage in unitization. What also needs
to be considered is the size of the firm operating on the lease. Larger
firms with many wells and access to many oil fields have an incentive to
want to engage in unitization because it will increase the net present
value of the profits by allowing any forgone production to be offset by
production engaged in today in another field, while small firms will
want to extract as fast as possible in order to maximize their net
present value of profits.

Of the unitization policies adopted by Texas, Oklahoma and the Federal
government, those of the Federal government are the most successful, due
mainly to the assignment of property rights defined in the Mineral
Leasing Act of 1920 and the ownership of the land by the Federal
government. The Act encourages unitization on Federal lands by
increasing the amount of land available for exploration and extraction
when the land is unitized. Since the land owner involved in Federal
government is the Federal government rents generated providing an
incentive for maximization. This contrasts to land involved in Oklahoma
and Texas where the land owners are individual citizens trying to
extract rents from the land they own encouraging a coordination
problem.\
Each jurisdiction provided its own regulation regarding unitization. The
information in Table 1 shows that unitization increased over time in all
three states, although Wyoming has the highest rate of unitization while
Texas has the lowest rate of unitization. This is explained by the
policy of the federal government in Wyoming encouraging unitization, and
the political power wielded by the small firms in East Texas forcing
unanimity when considering unitization. Oklahoma is in the middle due to
the less restrictive rules regarding formation of units, i.e. only 85%
(63% in the 1950s).

The regression results achieved by the authors generally support the
theory the put forth, with correctly signed significant parameter
estimates where they should be. They find that unitization in Wyoming
was nearly 60% higher than in Texas, while unitization in Oklahoma was
almost 40% more than in Texas. Not only do the estimates show higher
unitization in Wyoming and Oklahoma, they also emphasize the importance
of timing, since only Federal land allows unitization before production
begins.

The main results of this paper show “that policy approaches to
contracting problems must concentrate on agreement early, before
information advantages lead to differential rent holdouts.”[^2] Federal
lands that were owned by the government generated the greatest amount of
unitization because it owned the land and was trying to extract the
greatest amount of rents available through royalties and was better able
to internalize the problems associated with the common-pool aspects of
oil reservoirs. In Texas the authors note that small, politically
powerful firms were able to control the legislative process by helping
themselves out the most, a byproduct of which was difficulty in
attaining unitization. In Oklahoma the legislative process was not as
influenced by the small firms, but nonetheless were able to set a high
level of required agreement to unitization (although the level was
lowered after the political capital of the smaller firms had been
exhausted).

[^1]: Page 691

[^2]: Page 713
