***Libecap – State Regulation of Open-Access, Common-Pool Resources***

*Robert Cheley*

“In the absence of constraints on users, such as those provided by
informal community norms, more formal property rights, or other types of
state regulation, individuals competitively exploit the resource rapidly
and wastefully.” [^1] Although there is overexploitation with the
commons, providing solutions to the commons can be as problematic as the
commons themselves. Libecap’s paper “focuses on government responses to
the common pool, the private and political negotiations underlying them,
and the information and transaction costs that influence the design of
property rights and regulatory policies.”[^2]

We have abundant evidence of the existence of the problems associated
with the commons. One question often posed is, “Why do they exist?” even
if it is known that the value of the resource being exploited is being
rapidly devalued. The answer is it is not always in society’s best
interest to “put the matter right” to quote Coase’s famous paper *On
Social Cost*. The reason for the persistence of the commons is due
primarily to the existence of transaction costs that may be caused by
geographic scales or highly mobile resources, involvement of a large
number of heterogeneous parties, or limited information.

Among the most important type of transaction costs are information
costs. Asymmetric information regarding the depletion of a resource may
lead to different conclusion regarding the state of the resource, and
more importantly different conclusions regarding policy toward that
resource, especially when costs and benefits are being assigned to the
involved parties. This can lead to lengthy negotiating sessions in which
the state of the resource can change so that the agreed upon use of the
resource may be out dated. As Libecap notes, “how these bargaining or
negotiating problems are resolved and the time that it takes to do so,
influences the nature of the institutions adopted, when they are
implemented, and their ultimate impact on common-pool
externalities.”[^3] This can lead to a non-uniform spread of the costs
and benefits when resolving the commons.

Cases in which the individual parties involved can not come to a clear
resolution of the problem may require intervention by the state. The
state has at its disposal three general property assignments that it can
enforce, (1) A more definite assignment and enforcement of property
rights to the resource, such that only the owners have access to the
resource, (2) State ownership of the resource, or (3) a hybrid
private-state ownership of the resource. The type of state response to
property rights assignment will itself depend on (1) the physical nature
of the resource and the costs associated with assignment and monitoring
of the resource, (2) Losses of the resource if left to open-access, or
(3) issues dealing with the equity.

In cases of state intervention there will clearly be ‘winners’ and
‘loser’, even though in aggregate everyone should be made better off.
Therefore, it will clearly matter what the seriousness of the problem
is, the players involved, the structure of the compensation to be paid
out, and the form it is to be paid out in. This implies that politics
will determine the nature of the outcome and the distribution of the
benefits and costs, resulting in an institutional response that may not
resemble the ideal solution.

With all of these transaction costs to take into account, neoclassical
economics will clearly give a solution concept that will not match what
is seen in the ‘real world’. What is used instead is New Institutional
Economics (NIE) in which transaction costs are not discounted, thus
making “possible a better understanding of actual human behavior,
institutions, and resource outcomes.”[^4]

Several common-pool problems discussed are Wild Ocean Fisheries, Oil,
and Air Pollution. While each is a distinct problem, they are each
‘solved’ using the same ideas. Assignment of property rights, by
individuals involved in the cases where homogeneity allows it, by state
intervention in cases with large number of participants or great
heterogeneity.

For example, oil drillers in Texas and Oklahoma were limited by legal
regulation the number of wells that could be drilled, the spacing of
wells, and the amount of oil extraction the wells could do. What is
important about this case is that the political influences exerted by
the participants shaped the way legislation was written, providing a
legal framework that was by no means ideal, but still better than
open-access. The next step taken to improve the situation was
unitization, in which each oil reservoir was placed under management of
a single firm. However, because of long negotiating periods (on average
six years) many firms dropped out of the process, and by 1975 only 38%
of Oklahoma and 20% of Texas oil production had come under unitization,
even though it is a Pareto superior arrangement over the regulations
regarding number of wells, spacing, etc.

Even with all of the problems associated with trying to come to an
optimal solution regarding the common-pool problem, Libecap notes that
“there is a general trend from centralized ‘command-and-control’
regulation to greater reliance on individual property rights. In oil and
gas the focus is on promoting unitization; in fisheries, ITQ’s; and in
air quality regulation, tradable emissions permits.”[^5] With NIE we can
better begin to understand the process of regulatory change, and
emergence of particular institutions as answers to common-pool problems.

[^1]: Page 545

[^2]: Page 549

[^3]: Page 550

[^4]: Page 551

[^5]: Page 568
