***Libecap – Common Property***

*Robert Cheley*

The problem of the Hardin’s “Tragedy of the Commons” is “the failure of
individuals to consider the full social costs of their actions.”[^1] The
only solution out of the tragedy of the commons for common pool
resources is to fully assign property rights, even if some individuals
would be denied access to these resources. According to Hardin “The
alternative of the commons is too horrifying to contemplate. Injustice
is preferable to total ruin.”[^2] Libecap’s paper addresses the issue of
how bargaining can mitigate Hardin’s common pool problems.

According to Libecap, “Common-pool losses define the gains that are
possible from negotiations among competing parties to assign more
exclusive rights to resources or to agree to regulatory policies for
controlling access and use.”[^3] By exposing the ability of the losses
to be gained by the participating parties, they are induced to bargain
to improve the situation, but only after property rights have been
assigned. There are cases, however, when the net benefits are not high
enough to outweigh the net costs to encourage the collective action of
the participants. As was noted by Coase, “the existence of common
property does not necessarily mean that it is in society’s interest to
take actions to more completely define property rights.”[^4]

Once we acknowledge that the undefined property rights are not
necessarily a ‘bad’ thing, we can examine what the motivation is to
leave some resources with undefined property rights, while other are
subject to changes in institutions. The decision that must be made is
how large is the size of the rental stream generated by the assignment
of property rights and how does it compare to the rents generated with
common-pool access. Examples examined by Libecap include Gold and Silver
mining in the old American West, the open-access fisheries of
California, and crude Oil Production in the U.S. What these examples
illustrate is that government regulation is not needed in some instances
(Gold and Silver mining initially), and in other instances there is
little or no success with government intervention (California
Fisheries). In the case of American Oil Production however, lack of
property rights assignment actually led to an increase in the costs
associated with extraction. “Nevertheless, arguments over the
distribution of oil reservoirs rents resulting from proposed
institutional changes have constrained the adoption of both new property
rights and regulatory policies.”[^5]

In order to address the problem of common-pool access it must be
determined who will be denied access to the resource, or how each
participant will be limited. “In both settings, negotiating parties
attempt to maximize their net private gains from institutional
changes.”[^6] This can lead to problems of simultaneity because the
aggregate net benefits and individual shares of the resource will depend
on the proposed allocation. Coase noted that if transaction costs are
zero, the initial assignment of property rights does not matter. But,
transaction costs are unlikely to be zero, “the rights structure adopted
can have a significant impact on the subsequent total output and
production costs.”[^7]

Possible distributional outcomes range from communal rights, to private
property rights, each with multiple possible distributions of access and
use. The negotiations that determine who will have access to what will
be influenced by the number and heterogeneity of the parties involved.
When a new regime is being decided upon the parties involved will always
compare their expected net benefits under the status quo with their
expected net benefits under the new regime. A regime that may decide
upon could be the so-called ‘Prior Possession’. “Prior possession also
involves potential distributional concerns … A skewed property
distribution based on informal, prior-possession claims may be tolerated
because it is viewed as temporary and is not formally recognized by the
state.”[^8]

Side payments can adjust shares of property rights in order to mitigate
opposition to institutional changes in negotiations. Although the
easiest (according to economists) side payments are cash transfers, they
“may be too explicit a payoff to be politically acceptable so that other
forms of exchange or favorable assignment of property rights must be
devised.”[^9] Since cash transfers have been deemed unacceptable, groups
must resort to establishment of political influence by building
consensus about the issue. Their ability to sway a politician is
directly tied to the power they wield over a constituency.

“Time and precedent also play important rules in determining the range
of feasible institutions for addressing the commons.”[^10] Some
interested parties may have a vested interest in the status quo and
advantages to keeping the status quo in place. These advantages can
limit successfully resolution of the common-pool problems. This suggests
that there is an historical path dependence. The possible institutional
solutions available are defined by norms, customs and precedents.

Once common-pool access problems are resolved by defining how is “in”
and who is “out” problems can still exist when devising internal rules
of use by the “in” members. The members must define and enforce property
rules. Their success will be determined by the “value of the asset, the
homogeneity of the members in production costs, information and
preferences, as well as the legitimacy of the property allocation.”[^11]

The key point of Libecap’s paper is that any institutional arrangement
must consider the range of parties involved by considering the different
incentives that they have in negotiating to define the property rights
of the common-property. Because politicians direct the coercive powers,
judges rule on the cases to decide property rights and bureaucrats
decide how to interpret the rulings the parties involved are not limited
to just the claimants. All of the parties listed above must be thought
of as involved in the matter of negotiations.

[^1]: Page 317

[^2]: Hardin 1968

[^3]: Page 318

[^4]: Coase, 1960

[^5]: Libecap and Wiggins 1985

[^6]: Libecap 1989

[^7]: Demsetz 1972

[^8]: Page 320

[^9]: Page 321

[^10]: Page 321

[^11]: Page 320
