***Libecap and Wiggins – The Self-Enforcing Provisions of Oil and Gas
Unit Operating Agreements: Theory and Evidence***

*Robert Cheley*

The purpose of the article is to extend the theory and empirical
evidence regarding unitization contracts, specifically looking at
unitization contracts to examine whether they are incentive compatible.
The authors argue that in order for the contracts to work, they must
align the firms’ incentives over the contract’s life to maximize the
economic value to each firm without recontracting. The analysis done
here “is useful because it describes the desirable contract rules for
avoiding moral hazard.”[^1]

The Unit contract examined here generally consists of two documents: (1)
the agreement between firms and he land owners, and (2) the agreement
between the firms in the unit regarding well placement, benefit-cost
sharing, etc. These operation agreements have additional provisions that
define (1) the operating relationship among working interests, (2) the
phases of production as primary and secondary, and (3) describe the
mechanism by which parties are added or dropped from the unit. These
unit operating agreements do not specify action for all contingencies;
they contain both specifics and generalities. This can lead to a
breakdown in the unit’s operation and/or opportunistic behavior by any
of the participating firms. What the authors find however is that once
an agreement is reached there is no empirical evidence to indicate that
participating firms try to renegotiate the terms of the agreement.

Oil fields exhibit classic common pool problems. Typically, a single
reservoir of oil will be found under several independently owned surface
tracts. Because of US mineral laws of the right of first possession,
firms that engage in extraction of oil will only “own” the oil once it
is in their storage containers. Because of this, firms tend to over
extract the oil resource from the field. This causes problems because as
the oil is extracted, pressure, which is vital to retrieve the oil, is
lost, making extraction much more difficult and costly. Over extraction
is especially more likely given the competitive nature of the oil firms
operating on the tracts above the oil field.

In order to avoid these problems lease owners will attempt to come to a
more optimal plan, one option being unitization. There are difficulties
in coming to a unit agreement: arriving at a sharing rule in which each
lease owner feels that they are maximizing their potential profits from
the formation of the unit. An incentive compatible agreement must be
reached in order to avoid the problems associated with moral hazard.
Once the firms have the correct incentives, they wish to maximize the
value of the unit, and not just their share of the unit. This leads
naturally to needing a single firm to be the ‘operator’ of the unit. The
operator is usually the largest firm because they have the most to gain
from the unitization and will have the least amount of incentive to
‘cheat’.

Although the unit has feature attractive to the firms involved, two key
problems can arise in its formation (1) The ratio of oil to gas for a
particular firm, and (2) Informational issues, although the second
issued is not examined in this paper. In regard to the ratio of oil to
gas, Participation Areas can be formed in which the firms are assigned
equity shares in the resource that they don’t own. However, it has been
shown that unless the oil-to-gas shares are equal, incentive problems
can arise. The second problem that occurs is when to stop primary
production and start secondary production. This must be incorporated
into the agreement, and be specifically defined otherwise breakdowns can
occur.

The empirical evidence shown in Table 1 supports the theory put forth by
the authors. Of the 60 cases examined, 27 units are unpartitioned; of
the remaining 33, 19 are multiphase units, while 11 are dual
participation area units, with the last 3 being hybrid units. The
authors note significant differences between the categories. Among the
unpartitioned groups every single one has equal shares, satisfying the
criterion set forth for incentive compatibility. Among the 19 multiphase
units, equal shares are satisfied during the production phase, just as
required. Of the 11 dual participation area units, only one case is
equal shares. The three hybrid cases have contractual feature from both
unpartitioned and partitioned units, but closely resemble the dual
Participation Area units in the sample.

This article “extended the theory and empirical analysis of unitization
agreements that address common-pool losses in oil and gas
production.”[^2] The analysis illustrates the importance of incentive
compatible contracts to increase self-enforcement of the contracts. What
the authors also find is different unit types have different incentive
compatible contracts that must be agreed upon. The article has shown
that the content of the unitization contracts written regarding oil and
gas are important in aligning incentives and reducing enforcement costs
and promoting wealth maximization behavior.

[^1]: Page 527

[^2]: Page 545
