***Libecap and Johnson – Property Rights and Timber Policy***

*Robert Cheley*

Libecap and Johnson’s paper “examines Federal timber policy in the late
nineteenth century, which we (they) argue lead to significant rent
dissipation.”[^1] Although conservationists of the late nineteenth
century were trying to protect forests for future generations by
focusing on individuals that were circumventing current laws, the land
transfer policy of the Federal government was the real problem. They are
able to “test the hypothesis that Federal restrictions significantly
increased transaction costs”[^2] in the assignment of property rights,
specifically in the Pacific Northwest. Another finding is that of the
three laws relating to claimants of forest land (Timber and Stone,
Homesteading and Preemption) one can not *a priori* be shown to have the
lowest transaction costs, although empirically the Timber and Stone Act
had the lowest transaction costs.

The three laws allowed claimants to obtain forested lands in the west
were the Homestead Act, the Preemption Act, and the Timber and Stone
Act. The first two required claimants to improve the land they claimed,
while the third did not. These laws were sometimes used fraudulently by
timber companies to obtain tracks of land in the west. “Prospective
buyers contracted with agents for the locating and securing of the land.
The agents hired cruisers to select desirable plots and entrymen to
stake the claims under Federal law. As soon as those entrymen received
certificates of ownership from the Land Office, they passed them to the
agent who deeded the land to the final purchaser. In exchange, the
purchaser paid the agent an agreed upon price for the land.”[^3]

The process by which the timber companies acquired land significantly
increased transaction costs, leading to dissipation of rents. Entrymen
would try to maximize the benefit net of the cost of the land and the
cost of appearing to comply with the law that allowed him to claim the
land. With competition the expected gains are driven to zero, giving,
where the variables are as defined in the paper. What we see is that
there is a minimum price of land which will ensure that the net benefits
received by the entrymen will be at least zero. Figure 1 illustrates how
the timing of claiming is perturbed. If there were no regulations
regarding appropriation of forested lands then tracks of land would be
claimed by the timber companies at a time, T. With the regulations,
however, and the increased transaction costs, the optimal time becomes
T\* &gt; T. Because of the regulations, and the subsequent fraudulent
activity, the total rents dissipated on these lands was the optimal
price (with regulations) less the cost of the land.

Empirical results (in tables 1 and 2) show that cost of land per acre to
the timber companies was \$7, giving a price of \$1120 per 160-acre plot
of land, versus the sale price from the government of \$200 (\$400) for
land purchased under Homestead or Preemption Act (Stone and Timber Act).
This price does not include the costs of construction of structures to
comply with the Homestead or Preemption Act. Rough calculations give a
total rent dissipation of approximately \$17 million through 1907. Data
presented by Steer show that timber prices increased by as much as 14%.
If timber land also grew at that rate it would cause timber land claims
to be delayed by six years, which would have encouraged theft of timber,
something that conservationists were trying to avoid. The time delay,
coupled with the last rents illustrate that the “Federal policy was a
costly way of transferring land to private individuals.” [^4]

The authors construct two functions relating evasion cost to probability
of successfully obtaining title of land under the Timber and Stone Act
(T(q)) or the Preemption Act (S(q)). The general assumptions they use on
both functions is that they are increasing and concave in q. What they
find is that analytically it is impossible to distinguish which act will
cause the highest rent dissipation, but they find that empirically rent
dissipation was higher under the Preemption Act. Noted is the fact that
although the Timber and Stone Act was unpopular with conservationists,
it leads to a lower level of rent dissipation, and thus less of a chance
of overuse of the resource.

Although conservationists objected to the fraudulent transfer of
forested lands from public to private hands, it actually reduced theft.
Another result was that on average rents were not earned, since
competition ensured that “as soon as the expected value of the land rose
to cover the cost of claiming it.”[^5] The authors point out two reasons
for confusion regarding the earning of land rents. The first is that
observers didn’t fully take into account value of the land at the time
of the transfer and the increase in stumpage prices over time that
increased the value of that land. The second is that observers compared
the market price of the land after procurement of title with the
government price. On one point the authors agree with conservationists:
both agree that the Preemption Act was not worth the cost of
enforcement.

[^1]: Page 129

[^2]: Page 131

[^3]: Page 132

[^4]: Page 138

[^5]: Page 142
