***Libecap – Economic Variables and the Development of the Law: The Case
of Western Mineral Rights***

*Robert Cheley*

The purpose of Libecap’s paper is to examine the timing and emergence of
the legal institutions of laws and governments. In particular, he
examines the establishment of formal law in the Nevada territory during
the rush to mine the Comstock Lode discovered in Nevada. Libecap uses a
model proposed by Davis and North. They hypothesized the reason for
institutional development is a response to changes in private needs or
profit potential. The empirical evidence offered by Libecap strongly
supports the thesis that private mineral rights law in Western America
developed in response to economic forces and was not determined
exogenously. What Libecap describes is the movement from informal camp
mine laws to formal state laws governing mines in Nevada. What he shows
is that this movement corresponds to the increase in economic value of
the mines over the same period of time.

The model developed looks at the incentives (specifically net benefits)
the mine owners have in changing the laws regarding rights structures in
Nevada. The benefits received by the mine owners when property rights
are more firmly established are (1) Trespass can more easily be proven,
(2) state protection can be more easily obtained and (3) Violators can
be found guilty more easily because the role of law enforcement will be
more exactly described. However, these benefits come with their costs
(1) Learning costs in determining the right response by the law, (2)
expenditures spent lobbying officials and (3) Taxes paid to the
government to pay for enforcement. This implies that there are two
testable hypotheses: (1) Laws regarding mineral rights will be made more
specific and enforced more rigorously as the expected value of the mine
increases due to discoveries of ore and (2) The increases in precision
of laws regarding property rights will increase at a decreasing rate.

A summary of the history of the development of mineral rights law is
given. What we see is “that more formal rights arrangements were not
developed until competition for the land forced the miners to do so – a
finding which is consistent with the model.”[^1]Although informal mining
camp rules were set up, they were only short-term solution. With the
increase in expected present value of the mines, more formal systems
needed to be set up. Mining companies were successful in their lobbying
of Congress to set up a territorial government in Nevada to supplement
the mining camp laws already established regarding mineral rights law.
What Libecap finds is that during this period the legislation passed by
the territorial government is focused on sources of uncertainty. A worry
by mine owners was that the Federal Government would not recognize their
claims to land, and would try to sell off the mineral rich lands of the
west. This led to increased lobbying on the part of mine owners and
ultimately the statehood of Nevada in 1864. With statehood achieved the
state legislature continued to back the mining industries rights by
refining mineral rights initially established by the territorial
government, lobbying against feared Federal repossession of the mine
industry’s lands, and expansion of the judicial system. By 1868 mining
rights to the Comstock Lode were well established, and the legislation
and judicial action regarding that matter tapered off.

Libecap uses fifteen elements (characteristics) of mining law to check
the model empirically. What we see clearly in Figure 1 is that statues
and court rulings are increase very quickly in the beginning of the
mining period, but after 1868 they increase at a decreasing rate, a
result predicted by the model. A statistical model is constructed to
validate the results seen in Figure 1. The
annual-increase-in-the-specificity of mining law was regressed on the
average value of mine output, the lagged cumulative level of legal
precision and a constant. The regressions were run for the three phases
of mining activity on the Comstock Lode: 1858-1868, 1869-1879 and
1879-1895. Each period corresponds to the initial ore strikes, the
greatest output period and the terminal phase, respectively. What
Libecap finds is that the results generally support the hypothesis.

Libecap also analyzes the income transfers to better understand the
impact the legal structure had issues of equity. What he finds is that
huge tax breaks were given to mining companies by the state government.
Even the state constitution was influenced by the mining companies. The
first draft was soundly rejected because it required equal tax rates for
all property. A second draft was passed, but it didn’t include the tax
provision. Although mining companies were very successful in their
lobbying efforts, they did not use the legal system to form monopolies.
Although large concentration does occur, it was most likely due to
economies of scale present in the industry. Legislators aided the
process by passing laws that facilitated the transfer of title,
recognition of corporations and their right to sue. What we see her is
that although mining companies had political clout, the distortion of
equity isn’t as high as would be expected. This implies that the changes
seen from mining camp laws to formal state laws largely reflects the
needs of the miners to reduce ownership uncertainty as competition for
mine income grew.

What we see with the Nevada experience is “empirical verification of a
model of institutional change which emphasizes the net gain
considerations of the proponents of change.”[^2] We also see how
qualitative changes in the legal structure can be quantified. This
allows examination with greater precision the process by which those
changes occur. This in turn allows statistical analysis techniques and
hypothesis testing to be applied to these types of problems.

[^1]: Page 343

[^2]: Page 362
