***Johnson and Libecap – Politicians are Liars***

*Robert Cheley*

Plato has been credited with the quote “Ignorance, the root and the stem
of every evil.” Although some have claimed that the political price paid
for misleading constituents is similar to the price paid by a firm that
misleads consumers, Johnson and Libecap question this assertion. Johnson
and Libecap are able to show that because of the tenuous link between
the political arena and the market place there are incentives in modern
democracies for obfuscation of the truth by the political elite, and
thus the electorate is put in a perpetual state of ignorance of many
important issues. As an example, Johnson and Libecap use the
subsidization of ethanol, through the guise of national security
concerns, to show how money was transferred from tax payers to corn
farmers.

Johnson and Libecap note that there is a widespread belief in an analogy
between the competitive market and the political process. They question
how far this analogy can be taken given several key differences between
the two areas, namely the property rights structures. For example,
although there is a similar relationship between stockholders and firm
managers and between a constituency and the elected official, if a
firm’s managers decide to lie about the quality of the item being
produced and that decision leads to a decrease in stock value the
stockholders have an immediate course of action that they can take, i.e.
removal of the managers. There is also the prospect of the firm being
sued for false advertising, and a diminished firm reputation. Consumers
also have the option of not purchasing the product of the firm.

The story is different when we talk about constituents and elected
officials. If an elected official plays to special interests in which
the burden is placed on a tax payer outside of the district of the
elected official, the tax payer cannot vote against elected official,
nor is it clear that there is any action that tax payer can take against
constituents of the elected official. Also, the tax payer can’t
discontinue the consumption of the good (bad) provided by the elected
official unless they leave the country. Therefore, so long as the
elected official does no harm to his constituency, he will be largely
immune from penalty.

The model used by the incumbent maximizes the value function

The model basically states that the incumbent wishes to maximize the
percent of votes he gets by helping his constituents as much as
possible, while obfuscating the truth as much as possible to the other
group. This works for politicians so long as the probability of them
telling the truth on some issue is nonzero. What we end up with is
rationally ignorant voters shading their bets, but not dismissing
political rhetoric in its entirety, which gives rise to why political
rhetoric exists. Another component involved is the length of time it
takes for the true distributional effects of the legislation to take
place, usually sometime after the election. If the incumbent can delay
information for an extended period of time regarding the issue, say
until the next election or later, then their incentives to do so will be
high.

As an example of the incentives for politicians to hide the effects of
legislation, Johnson and Libecap survey the ethanol subsidy, first
introduced into law in 1978. Because of the Arab oil embargo in the
early 1970’s a movement was made toward decreasing dependence on foreign
oil. On the surface it appeared that tax payer money was spent on
encouraging corn farming to be used in ethanol production. What was
actually happening was that large transfers to corn farmers were being
masked by politicians in the name of decreasing dependence of foreign
oil, namely an increase in indirect farm subsidies from \$88 million to
\$25.8 billion.

In 1986 a report released by the USDA stated that “the industry (ethanol
production) could not survive through 1995 without massive Government
subsidies, given the outlook for petroleum prices.”[^1] The metaphorical
cat was finally out of the bag, and the ethanol industry pounced to make
sure that the report was discredited. Elected officials in the House and
Senate from corn growing states passed legislation to mandate another
study to be done with members of the corn industry to give a more
complete picture, while at the same time dismissing the findings of the
original report. A second hurdle faced by ethanol produces was
competition from the cheaper to produce additive alternative MTBE. With
this competition came more information about the nature of the ethanol
subsidy. These two factors lead to the limited role that ethanol has
played in the oxygenated gasoline market.

What we see in the ethanol subsidy program is an attempt by politicians
to block the dissemination of information to the public in order to make
their constituencies better off. By doing this they were able to mask
the transfer of wealth from non-constituents to constituents under the
guise of decreased dependence on foreign oil and were largely
successful, until the release of the USDA report in 1986, and the
competition faced by MTBE producers in the late 1980’s.

[^1]: Page 119
