*Lueck – The Rule of First Possession and the Design of Law*

*Robert Cheley*

In this article, Lueck uses both theory and evidence to analyze various
first possession rules. Carefully defining “possession” and how it is
enforced, he is “able to provide a link between models of racing and
models of resource overexploitation that connects seemingly independent
legal rules.”[^1] The key insight of Lueck’s paper is that possession
may extend to either the entire stock or a onetime flow from the stock.

There are two key assumptions made in the paper, possession of a single
asset (this is later relaxed and the implications explored, all parties
involved are risk neutral (this is done so that the focus is on
incentives rather than avoidance). Lueck examines two types of
possession: possession of stocks and possession of flows. Possession of
stock allow the first person that claims the stock to be the ‘owner’,
while Possession of flows allows the rule of capture, i.e. if you shot a
bison it is yours, whereas the possession of stock would apply to the
whole herd of bison.

The decision to allow either of the preceding possession rules will lead
to either private property (in the case of possession of the stock) or
to open access (in the case of the possession of the flow), both of
which can lead to dissipation of rent. This dissipation can be caused by
a race to claim the asset, or by overuse of the asset. In a race to
claim, initial overinvestment causes a misallocation of resources,
whereas in the open access case dissipation is caused by overuse of the
property to the point of damage.

There are several solution concepts explored by Lueck for the race to
establish ownership, a single claimant solution which he compares to
homogeneous and heterogeneous claimant solution concepts. The single
claimant solution is derived from the private maximization problem

He finds that the optimal time to establish ownership is when the
present value of the asset’s flows is equal to the present value of the
opportunity cost of establishing rights (both evaluated at time t^s^,
the time at which ownership of the stock is established under first
possession).

In the case of homogeneous claimants, rights are established too early.
By being the first to an asset with net positive value, they become full
owners of the asset, but this causes the claim to be made “too early”,
i.e. before time t^s^. The most important aspect of this implication is
that at equilibrium rents are fully dissipated.

“Claimant heterogeneity reduces and possibly eliminates the dissipation
of wealth.” [^2] Here, Lueck refers to heterogeneity as gaps between
contenders and costs, not the variance in distribution of costs of
acquiring ownership. The value function to be solved here,

where t^i^ is the time at which claimant i makes a claim to the asset.
The implication of this maximization problem shows that as heterogeneity
of claimants increases, the level of dissipation decreases, and may
actually disappear. Lueck notes that the heterogeneity argument ignores
the possibility of a claimant, say j, gaining ground in cost advantages
by expending resources to improve their cost function. If this is
allowed to happen, the classic race problem is once again seen.

By ignoring possible improvements of cost functions the classic race to
claim is seen, for the most part costs are influenced by exogenous
factors causing dissipation to be incomplete. The biggest influence of
this heterogeneity, and thus the ability to capture rents, will be the
way the law defines possession. As the examples in Lueck’s paper show,
“laws that rely on first possession tend to define possession and grant
ownership quite early thwart wasteful investment.”[^3]

What Lueck is able to add to the literature on property rights is a new
way to look at the way in which property rights are formed. While more
economists have argues that first possession rights might cause
dissipation of rents, Lueck is able to show that this is not always the
case. His analysis hinges on first possession applying either to the
entire stock or to a flow of that stock. Not only is dissipation path
dependent, Lueck shows that “when first possession has the potential for
a race, the law tends to mitigate dissipation by assigning possession
when claimant heterogeneity is greatest. However, when first possession
breeds a rule of capture, the law tends to limit access and restrict the
transfer of access rights to limit open access exploitation.”[^4]

[^1]: Page 395

[^2]: Page 399

[^3]: Page 402

[^4]: Page 430
