***Ostram - Self-Governance of Common-Pool Resources***

*Robert Cheley*

The conventional theory of common-pool-resources assumes that those
involved are “homogeneous in terms of their assets, skills, discount
rates and cultural views. They are also assumed to be short-term
profit-maximizing actors who posses complete information.”[^1] In the
laboratory and in the field the results implied by these assumptions are
not always borne. Specifically, the existence of self-governing use of
common pools has not been seriously considered in the literature, even
though it has been seen in experimental settings and in the field.
Ostram’s essay discusses some of the experimental and empirical results
that have been seen over the years and comment on the fact that they do
not always agree with the theory of the common-pool problem.

A baseline experiment using Gordon’s 1954 time-independent model has
been used with a fixed number of participants set at eight. In the
experiment the participants are endowed with a similar amount of tokens
which can be used to invest in a joint activity with a quadratic
production function or an alternative fixed return activity. When
participants are not allowed to communicate the results show that the
participants invest too heavily in the common-pool resource. This leads
to rent dissipation, which agrees with the theoretical predictions.

The next set of experiments explores the implications of allowing
communication. Three experiments allowed communication in which (i)
subjects are allowed to communicate only once and then make a series of
independent decisions, or (ii) subjects are allowed to communicate
before each decision round, or (iii) subjects have to pay in order to
communicate before each decision round. In all three experiments
agreements made by participants are *not* enforced by the experimenter.
In all three cases the participants obtain a higher net yield when
communication is allowed than when it is not allowed, even though there
is no enforcement by the experimenter. Another experiment in which the
sanctioning institution is controlled by the experimenter is added to
the baseline case. The participants are allowed to incur a cost after
the individual decision to invest is made in order to sanction a
subject, by charging a fine. The experiment shows that when the
participants have no opportunity to communicate and the sanctioning body
is controlled by the experimenter “significantly more sanctioning that
predicted”[^2] is found to occur, leading to a reduction in net yield.
These experiments lead to the conclusions that can not be fully
explained by the theory.

Studies done on data collected in the field (specifically water rights
on Nepali farms) using three measure of performance[^3] indicate that
“holding other variables constant, irrigation systems governed by the
farmers themselves perform significantly better on all three performance
measures.”[^4] This implies that farmers that are allowed to monitor
themselves do better on average than those farmers that are monitored by
the government.

Although experimental and empirical results fail to hold with theory
when communication is allowed, a consensus exists regarding the
attributes of participants and resources that are likely to increase the
probability of the formation of self-governing associations. Attributes
of Resources include: (i) Feasible Improvement, (ii) Reliable and valid
indicators of resource condition, (iii) Predictability and (iv) Spatial
extent. Attributes of Participants include: (i) Salience, (ii) Common
Understanding, (iii) Discount Rate (iv) Distribution of interests, (v)
Trust, (vi) Autonomy and (vii) Prior organizational experience.

In addition to these attributes each participant must compare their net
benefit under the new regime with that under the status quo. If this new
regime offers a positive benefit then they will support the new regime,
otherwise they will support the status quo. In empirical settings,
coalitions of participants are likely to form based on similar costs and
benefits, i.e. the participants form homogeneous sub-groups. Depending
on the power of a coalition and the decision mechanism for deciding
institutional change, distributional issues may lead to the blockage of
a new regime that would have higher social benefit than cost, if the
powerful coalition has higher costs than benefits. This illustrates the
problems that can be created by heterogeneity of participants in a
common-pool problem. Similar problems can arise if external authorities
are the ultimate decision makers for deciding institutional changes.

Common-pool participants in empirical settings are likely not to face a
well defined cost-benefit analysis. Thus, in order to get the
participants to understand the structure of the resource, and therefore
the costs and benefits involved, design principles have been postulated
to lead to a solution: (i) Clearly Defined Boundaries, (ii) Congruence,
(iii) Collective Choice Agreements, (iv) Monitoring, (v) Graduated
Sanctions, (vi) Conflict-Resolution Mechanisms, (vii) Minimal
Recognition of Rights to Organize, and (viii) Nested Enterprises (for
common-pool resources that are a part of a larger system)[^5]. These
design principals should allow a clear definition of costs and benefits.

Ostram’s essay has illustrated the fact that while the conventional
theory does a good job of describing and predicting the outcomes of
common-pool problems when the participants are alienated from one
another, a theory that describes the more general case where
communication is allowed and includes the case where communication does
not occur does not yet exist. Until such a theory can be found, a
satisfactory description of the solutions to the general common-pool
problem will be absent.

[^1]: Page 425

[^2]: Page 426

[^3]: “(1) The Physical conditioning of irrigation systems, (2) the
    quantity of water available to farmers at different seasons of the
    year, and (3) the agricultural productivity of the systems”, Page
    427

[^4]: Page 427

[^5]: See Table 1, page 431
