***Pashigian – Environmental Regulation***

*Robert Cheley*

“The epitome of social legislation is environmental regulation”[^1], so
claims Pashigian. The success of economists in applying the so-called
self-interest hypothesis has met with limited success, and even called
into question its usefulness. Many critics will argue that the
self-interest hypothesis will explain legislation regarding specific
industries, but not social legislation. Pashigian attempts to show that
in fact the self-interest hypothesis can explain the social legislation
of the 1970’s. Specifically he investigates the application of the
self-interest hypothesis to the environmental legislation of 1976 and
1977, and claims that “the weight of the evidence indicates that
Prevention of Significant Deterioration (PSD) policy cannot be explained
solely by regional differences in political philosophy or tastes for
environmental regulation.”[^2]

The model used by Pashigian looks only at votes from the House of
Representatives. He does this because large variations can occur across
state, but are less likely to occur across congressional district. The
particular votes he looks at are from 1976 and 1977 regarding five
Nondegradation Amendments and four Automobile Emissions Amendments. His
fully specified model is

where the variables are as he defines in the paper. The results from
this fully specified model show that based on the census regions, New
England had the highest percentage of in favor of stringent
environmental regulation (both Nondegradation Amendments and Auto
Emissions Amendments). The strongest support for these stringent
environmental regulations came from New England, the Middle Atlantic,
the Pacific regions with the East North Central region having strong
support for the Nondegradation Amendments, but not the Automobile
Emissions Amendments. These results show that congressmen from areas
with relatively dirty air were defenders of clean air in other parts of
the country, more so than the congressman from the clean air areas.

In order to isolate the effects of region from other effects, Pashigian
utilizes a logit model. What he finds is that urbanized areas strongly
support the PSD and auto emissions policies, but that fast growing
areas, were strongly opposed to the PSD and auto emission policies.
However, it is noted “that faster growing districts did not oppose PSD
policy more than auto emission policy”[^3], which Pashigian calls
disappointing. As would be expected, solid support was reported in
districts with high concentrations of Democrats.

Pashigian next compares results obtained by Peltzman (1983) on economic
issues to his results on environmental issues using Peltzman’s model.
What he finds is that there is a difference between the voting
tendencies of Congressmen regarding economic issues and environmental
issues. Pashigian goes on to say that “these findings do suggest that
locational competition considerations play a more important role in
determining the votes on environmental issues than on economic
issues”[^4] but he never explains how this fits within the framework of
the self-interest hypothesis.

The next issue examined is the party effect. Pashigian examines a vote
in 1976 before the election and one again in 1977 comparing the votes of
the defeated congressmen from 1976 with those of the freshman
congressmen in 1977. What he find is that nearly 45% of Democrats that
lost seats to republicans voted for stringent PSD policy, and claims
that the Democrats that lost as being in more “conservative” districts,
and less supportive of the PSD policy. I would think that this number
would be higher if that were the case, and that the reason for the
change in party from one year to the next may have more to do with other
idiosyncratic issues not captured in the model, such as retiring
congressmen, which may account for some of the turnover.

The final factors examined are membership in pressure groups, abatement
costs and support for PSD policy. What he finds is that *if* membership
to a pressure group, i.e. the Sierra Club, is exogenous then these
groups exert a strong political influence on the decision makers of that
district. What he calls an unexpected result is the “support for PSD
policy decreases as share of particulates and sulfur emissions
increases”[^5] which he contributes to the “high share of particulate
and sulfur emissions in selected states in the South and West, e.g.
Kentucky, Nevada and Arizona.”[^6]

In Pashigian’s concluding remarks he states that “the self-interest
hypothesis gives a more complete understanding of why northern-urban
constituencies are for, and southern and western and rural
constituencies are against, PSD policy.”[^7] He also states that other
hypothesis lack a satisfying explanation of the subtle variations in
voting across environmental and economic issues, stating that “these
findings suggest that self-interest has played a prominent role even in
environmental legislation, a prime example of social legislation”[^8]
although I remain unconvinced.

[^1]: Page 551

[^2]: Page 553

[^3]: Page 564

[^4]: Page 570

[^5]: Page 576

[^6]: Page 576

[^7]: Page 580

[^8]: Page 581
