***Rose – The Comedy of the Commons***

Robert Cheley

Historically, the land between the low and high tides had been
considered public property not for beach goers, but for fishing and
nautical navigation purposes. How then does the beach go from the state
of private property to public property? Rose’s paper examines the role
that public property has played in law using this example of beach
access as well as road access. She examines why “public property” is
applied so widely to these places.

There are three theories that try to describe how property becomes
“public”. The first, *public trust theory*, asserts that people have
always had a right to the property and that any private rights are
subordinate to the public’s trust rights. The second, a prescriptive
theory, claims that public usage over a period of time gives rise to an
implied property right as in a gift or grant form from the private
owner(s). In the third, a theory of custom, the public asserts ownership
under a claim so old as to be back to prehistoric times.

Each theory has been received with mixed views. Some view the public
trust and prescriptive theories as detrimental to private property
rights. If a claim can be made that falls into either of the first two
categories regarding any private property, then all property could
become public, and there would be a disincentive to improve the
property, or the property owners could actively abuse the property, or
any path to the property, to make it unacceptable for use by the
“public”. More generally, these theories engender uncertainty about
property rights, invite conflicts and can cause a squandering of
resources.

How can custom and tradition applied to the land between high and low
tide be extended to include beaches as objects in the “public” trust?
What characteristics of this area allow for the property to be placed in
the public trust? Answers may be found in the idea of “public goods”.
When a market fails to give the socially optimal uses for resources, it
is said to fail. These involve the familiar examples of externality,
public goods and natural monopolies. Because of information and
transaction costs, the market failures may remain even though there
could an existing solution that would be Pareto optimal.

Rose investigates “the problem of inherently public property through a
closer examination of older doctrines whereby the public acquired rights
to use property.”[^1] She finds that three theories of public property
have been applied mostly to support claims of access to roads and
waterways, although she notes that the theory of “custom” has been the
weakest in American law.

If property is to be shifted from private hands to public hands, exactly
who is the public? Rose finds that public so often spoken of in the
older doctrines is the “public at large”. What are the characteristics
of the property that was shifted from private to public hands? The
property must have an ability to be monopolized by private persons, or
the public’s claim bad to be superior to that of the private owner.

What is embedded in Rose’s analysis is the idea that public property was
made available not just for the reasons cited above, but also in the
interest of protecting commerce and encouraging recreation, both of
which she argues are encouraging elements in the socialization of a
citizenry.

Commerce is an activity that becomes better the more that participate,
not only because it expands the capacity to produce wealth for all, but
also because it enables the participants to practice skills of
socialization. These skills of socialization encourage team work, ideas
of community, and development of empathy. These all foster a community
spirit that can make a community more tightly-knit than it was before.

Recreation encourages community by allowing wealthy and poor, or so she
argues, to play together and allows for the ultimate democratizing of
the citizenry. In reality, I believe that this part of her argument is
weaker in a contemporary setting (and maybe even in a historical
setting) since children from Compton probably have little chance to
socially interact with children from Beverly Hills, especially on the
playground in parks, or even beaches.

Rose’s paper concludes that the reason for the existence of public
property is to allow socializing activities to take place in these
public areas. Ideas can change for what is a socializing activity, but
the presence of public areas will always be need. While I believe that
this may account for public property in densely populated areas, such as
New York and Boston (east coast cities), but public places in areas such
as Los Angeles and San Diego (west coast cities) will not have public
areas for the same reasons, because of the suburban sprawl that
surrounds them, socially isolating people into homogeneous communities.

[^1]: Page 722
