***Rose: Expanding the choices for the global commons: comparing
newfangled tradable allowance schemes to old-fashioned common property
regimes***

*Robert Cheley*

Hardin’s paper on the ‘tragedy of the commons’ pointed out the problems
inherent in public property, i.e. property available to everyone, yet
owned by no one, which leads to over utilization. Hardin, and his pupil,
Ophuls, suggested that there were two alternatives to the tragedy of the
commons; a Leviathan or private property. The Leviathan solution has
proved to be problematic due to its high cost and inflexible nature.
Private property is more flexible, but can also suffer from high costs,
usually associated with assigning property rights. The purpose of this
paper is to look at alternatives outside of the Hardin-Ophuls dichotomy,
specifically tradable environmental allowances (TEA) systems.

The alternative offered by many authors is the observed common property
regimes (CPRs). CPRs put the entire stock of resource under exclusive
and unitary management. Though the members themselves view the property
as common, for the rest of the world the property has been assigned to
the participants of the CPR. These CPRs work very well on small-scale
resources, like local fisheries, pastures, especially when the group
involved in highly homogenous, particularly in terms of costs. When
global commons, i.e. open-access problems such as air pollution, fishery
management, etc. are considered, CPRs are unable to manage the resource.
The solution to this has been to assign individual property rights,
instead of group property rights, ala fisheries.

TEAs are similar to CPRs in that they depart from the Hardin-Ophuls
solution dichotomy. TEAs are a hybrid of the two solutions provided by
Hardin-Ophuls, “even though they allocate individual quotas of the
resource in question, TEAs are created and policed by governments to a
degree far surpassing conventional property rights.”[^1] The main
purpose of both the TEA and the CPR is to retain the “core” of the
resource, e.g. the groundwater aquifer, in order to renew itself on a
regular basis.

The steps involved in contracting CPRs and TEAs are: (1) Setting the
Total Allowable Resource Use, (2) Defining and Allocating Individual
Entitlements, (3) Keeping Track of Individual Entitlements and (4)
Enforcement. Each of these has their own problems associated with them,
but the author does not discuss these in great detail as that is not the
point of the article. The author does note that CPRs and TEAs have their
strengths and weaknesses, e.g. CPRs may be better at dealing with
chaotic environmental actions, complex human interactions and are more
likely to be motivated by the participants, while TEAs are morel likely
to be impartial, and less likely to be influenced by vendetta.

The most interesting point of the paper is that TEAs and CPRs appear to
be the mirror images of one another in terms of property rights
organizational forms. The strengths of one are likely to be the
weaknesses of the other, and vice versa. What we see is that TEAs are a
better organizational form for strangers, while CPRs work in instances
where long, stable relationships exist. One advantage of TEAs over CPRs
is their explicitness in terms of goals, procedures, rights structures,
and enforcement. The global commons can be seen as a tapestry of much
smaller commons problems, all interacting with each other, and thus
requiring a much less simplistic idea for a solution, leading us to the
hybrid rights like TEAs. What we see is that the Hardin-Ophuls dyad of
“Leviathan or property” is too simplistic in terms of solutions.

[^1]: Page 4
