***Rose – Evolution of Property Rights***

Robert Cheley

Why do we need private property? Property has an intrinsic ability to
internalize the externalities of labor. It saves us from a life that is
short, nasty and brutish (the so-called Hobbesian world) because it
mobilizes self-interested self interested economic agents to labor like
nothing else. It allows trade between people what they have created with
their property for things that they want, instead of allowing a take and
grab society. “Thus, on this now quite standard view, retold in a
variety of contexts, property rights help mollify aggression, mobilize
self-interest toward useful labor, and restore a new Eden of plenty and
prosperity.”[^1] The only question remaining is, “Where does private
property come from?” This is the question that Rose attempts to answer
in her essay. The basic nature of the problem of private property is
that when broken down to its most basic components is that it turns into
the classic prisoners’ dilemma problem, where the economic agents
involved would be better off cooperating, but because the agents are
rational, they end up not cooperating. Theorists such as John Locke have
skirted this problem “by kicking it upstairs.”[^2] The agents involved
create a government. But the problem hasn’t been solved; it has simply
been moved up a level to the government, which is made up of rational
economic agents, so the problem still exists.

More recent attempts to solve this problem have evolved into what is
commonly called the tragedy of the commons. “It argues that very
forcefully that in the face of scarcity, sinful (self-interested)
rational actors are quite unlikely to invent property after all.”[^3]
What has been found is that the idea of property does not just fall from
the sky, it requires favorable circumstances, inventiveness, effort and
good luck. The key idea that must be recognized is that the evolution of
property is a social institution.

The invention of property seems to require certain smoothing factors;
specifically religion, kinship, or mixed social and commercial
relations. “These factors can support group effort – and the individual
self-restraint – necessary to negotiate and abide by social norms.”[^4]
But it must be noted that the property regimes do not exist in a vacuum
and must evolve over time in order to alleviate externalities that may
be present either because of missing information when the property
regime was established, or because the costs of eliminating the
externality were greater than the benefits. There are several factors
that can either assist or impede readjustment. “Among the expediting
factors are the magnitude and the obviousness of common-pool losses
stemming from misaligned definitions of property rights; but among the
impediments – increasing costs of ‘re-contracting’ – are again numbers
and heterogeneity of stakeholders in the older regime, as well as
difficulties in spreading more of less evenly the gains from property
redefinitions.”[^5] What becomes apparent is that the evolution of
property rights does occur according to some necessary way, but in a
chancier way.

An achievement of law and economic approach to property has been the
lesson that contractual and property regimes are not costless. It has
been found that property as a technique is most likely to emerge where
property rights are defined relatively inexpensively. Clearly, though,
the characteristics of the resource are important in assignment of
property rights. Land, for example, is immobile, easily recognizable and
excludable. But land lies near other mobile resources, such as water,
air and wildlife. What is often seen is what Rose calls a ‘piggy-back’
effect on these resources. The piggy-backing of the unassigned resources
are not a problem at first, but as the number of users increase, or the
intensity of use of the unassigned resource increase, the common-pool
problems costs rise and an incentive to assign property rights develops
and becomes cost effective to implement.

One idea that is frequently used in environmental issues is the
‘keep-out’ idea, where new entrants are barred from use of the resource.
A problem with this approach is that gate-crashing can still occur by
latecomers and outsiders. A second problem is that the insiders may
overuse the resource, which in turn may require some internal policing.
As would be expected, the policing of the insiders is easier if they are
homogeneous and/or few in number. Other attempts at assigning property
rights include Manner-of-use constraints and hybrid regulations, each of
which has their own problems. Manner-of-use constraints have the same
problem as the keep-out idea: heterogeneous participants make
enforcement much more difficult. Hybrid regulations are plagued by high
costs of monitoring and enforcement.

What has been observed with the environmental story above is that the
management regimes can become increasingly sophisticated as the
resources experience increasing pressure. There are three implications
of this environmental story: (i) Evolution of property is not
unidirectional, (ii) it is no more logically compulsory than the more
general property story and (iii) the evolution of environmental
management regimes is a highly contingent matter.

What Rose is able to illustrate is that the idea of property doesn’t
come from a mystical source, and it is not given to us by a government,
but comes instead from the need to minimize or eliminating costs
associated with not having property rights. Although the problem mimics
the classical prisoners’ dilemma problem, the solution need not be a
socially non-optimal choice of non-cooperation, but could instead be
cooperation under the right circumstances, i.e. homogenous participants,
small number of participants. She states at the end, “the institution
(property) most prominently reflects our fallen and sinful nature – but
also out very slight glimmer of divinity.”[^6]

[^1]: Page 94

[^2]: Page 94

[^3]: Page 94

[^4]: Page 95

[^5]: Page 95

[^6]: Page 97
