***Smith - Semicommon Property Rights and Scattering in the Open
Fields***

Robert Cheley

Henry Smith states that “in a ‘semicommons’, a resources is owned and
used in common for one major purpose, but, with respect to some other
major purpose, individual economic units – individuals, families, or
firms – have property rights to separate pieces of the commons.” The
most widely used example of the semicommons is the open-field system of
land ownership in medieval and modern northern Europe. This arrangement
may seem to contain all of the problems of private and public property
with no distinct advantages, but as Smith shows, this is in fact not the
case.

In a typical village two or three large fields of arable land would
surround a nucleated village several hundred farming families. The
fields were held in what Smith has called a semicommons status. The land
“owning” peasants were allowed to farm on their particular strips of
land during the growing season. During the non-growing season, the
flocks of sheep and other livestock were allowed to graze over the
entire commons land, given the land its distinct semicommons label.

Why would such an arrangement exist, and why should it persist for
several hundred years, especially in light of the problems associated
with the commons? One reason is the different economies (or
diseconomies) of scale present in grazing (or farming). Since grazing is
subject to economies of scale, decentralized ‘ownership’ use of the land
by all of the villagers would make the most efficient use of the land.
Similarly, the diseconomies of scale for farming would encourage the
individual ownership of land by the peasants.

What is most puzzling about the open-field lands is the practice of
scattering, whereby each land owning peasant owns his land in each of
the available fields, not consolidated into one field. This has long
been viewed as an attempt at egalitarianism by the farmers to promote
equality. Smith shows that in reality, the reason for the scattering was
to combat the problems that can be associated with the semicommons.
Smith notes that there are four cases in the semicommons where
individuals have an incentive to overuse their competitors land and
under use theirs during the commons period of the land use: (i) Commons
use imposes costs on commonly owned attributes, (ii) Commons use imposes
costs on privately owned attributes (iii) Private uses costs on private
property, and (iv) Private use imposes costs on the commonly owned
attribute.

The difference between the normal concept of the commons and the
semicommons can be seen in cases i, and iii, where a small fraction of
the cost is internalized. In case ii there is no (all) internalization
by the participants depending on the relative power of the participant
in relation to the other participants; if a participant is very powerful
(weak) they can direct (have directed) all of the use someone else’s
(their) property.

The basic problem of the semicommons can be boiled down to the same
problem faced in the classic prisoners’ dilemma. Each land owner would
rather direct the grazing animals to some other parcel of land rather
than their own, but each participant knows this, which can lead to a
greater social cost than what would happen in a pure commons case.

The solution to this problem is the scattering mentioned earlier. By
scattering the fields owned by any one villager, the ability to
distinguish property by the herder becomes increasingly difficult, so
that every farmer is experiencing the effect of the grazing. Sharing
rules prohibited land owners from consolidating land. If holding could
be consolidated it could be the case that several land owners would
collaborate to keep the herdsman from grazing on their land. These so
called sharing rules help to abate the strategic behaviors that would
otherwise be present in the semicommons. Scattering could also address
the problem with resource expenses on dispute resolution. Besides the
cost decrease that scattering could cause, less dramatic benefits can
also be had, namely, scattering permitted manure to be spread more
evenly.

We would only expect to see semicommons ownership in areas where its
benefits outweigh its costs. While previous authors had proposed
explanations for the existence of the semicommons ranging from
applications of portfolio theory to holdouts, Smith argues that they
exist to combat the problems of the semicommons. Smith’s paper shows
that semicommon ownership can allow capture of rents generated from
operation of multiple scales, for which previous explanations do not
consider.
