***Stavins - Transaction Costs and Tradeable Permits***

*Robert Cheley*

The purpose of this paper is to examine “the effects of transaction
costs on the performance of markets for pollution control.”[^1]The
author claims that previous studies have overstated the potential gains
from adopting certain mechanisms, i.e. tradable emissions rights, by
comparing command-and-control results to a least-cost benchmark. A
comparison that is more realistic and appropriate would be between
command-and-control and either reasonably constrained theoretical
permits or actual trading programs.

As Coase and so many others have pointed out, transaction costs can
inhibit trade. In the tradable permit market, like the one examined by
the author, factors that can lead to this inhibition are (1)
Concentration in the permit market, (2) concentration in the output
market, (3) non-profit-maximizing behavior, (4) preexisting regulatory
environment, or (5) the level of monitoring and enforcement. Transaction
costs are omnipresent in market economies, and can arise because of the
transfer of property rights due to search costs, or other informational
costs. The author classifies transaction costs as due to resource input
or margins between buyers and sellers, i.e. bid-ask spreads. The author
focuses on the margins aspect of transaction costs, allowing us to think
of transaction costs as the direct costs of financial brokerage
services. The author identifies “three potential sources of transaction
costs in the tradable-permit market: (1) search and information, (2)
bargaining and decision, and (3) monitoring and enforcement.”[^2] Also
identified are two circumstances under which these transaction costs
might be very high: (1) technological reasons, and (2) institutional
design that impedes trade.

Anecdotal evidence cited by the author confirms intuition: the key to
successful policies implementation is to minimize transaction costs.
Policies that are designed but lack this fundamental design
consideration are more likely to fail in achieving their stated
objectives.

A model is developed in which a cost-minimizing pollution control
program for a uniformly mixed-flow pollutant, in which the focus is not
on individual emission levels, but aggregate emission levels. It is
assumed that the cost function is well behaved, i.e. concave, over the
relevant ranges. One way to achieve cost-effective allocation of the
burdens of pollution control is to allow a non-uniform standard to
ensure that all firms are controlling emission at the same marginal
cost. The monitoring and enforcement costs of this policy would be
prohibitively high, however. An option out of this impasse would be to
allow emission permits to be sold in a market environment.

The model considered here minimizes not only the pollution reduction
costs, but also the transaction costs. The equilibrium arrived at when
transaction costs are included indicate that the cost effective
equilibrium is the sum of marginal control costs and marginal
transaction costs, and not as the idealized transaction costless world
equilibrium of equating of marginal control costs among sources. When
transaction costs are considered we see that their effect “is
unambiguously to decrease the volume of permit trading, …, as long as
the marginal control cost functions are nondecreasing over the relevant
ranges.”[^3] This leads to the conclusion that if the initial allocation
of permits deviates from the equilibrium non-transaction costs
allocation then the total expenditures on pollution control will exceed
the cost-minimizing solution. The author then asks the central question,
“Can the initial allocation of permits affect the outcome of trading?”
And the answer he arrives at is, “It depends.” He derives what the
effect would be finding that the concavity of the common transaction
cost function will determine the effect that is seen. All of this means
that “in the presence of transaction costs, the initial distribution of
permits can matter in terms of efficiency, not only in terms of equity.

Implications of the paper are (1) “Transaction costs increase the
aggregate costs of control indirectly by reducing total trading volume
and directly by adding to total costs of control”[^4], (2) “Unless
transaction costs are prohibitive, tradable permits will retain an
information advantage over command-and-control approaches and emission
taxes, but that advantage will be less in the presence of significant
transaction costs.”[^5]

What this paper shows is that transaction costs matter when establishing
policy to deal with pollution. Regulators need not only be concerned
with equity issues, and efficiency issues, but need to realize that in
the presence of transaction costs, these will both be affected by
distributional issues.

[^1]: Page 133

[^2]: Page 134

[^3]: Page 139

[^4]: Page 144

[^5]: Page 145
