***Umbeck – Might Makes Right***

*Robert Cheley*

The purpose of Umbeck’s paper “is to use the orthodox theory of
competition to explain the formation and distribution of property rights
among individuals.”[^1] Umbeck points out that ownership rights can come
about because of any number of reasons, i.e. beauty, speed, specific
skills, but that violence or threat of violence are the only reasons
that can be easily enforced. This is because ownership rights require
that all engaged parties respect the rights regime that has been put in
place; those that don’t agree with the regime must be forced to comply
or else forcefully excluded. Umbeck also shows that force underlies all
allocative systems because any allocative systems that can be thought of
require agreement by the involved parties, except force. However, it is
important to note that force will not necessarily be the system by which
individuals ration goods. Umbeck reasons that all of this implies that
any initial endowment agreed upon through some rationing system must
generate the same initial endowment that would be had under violence.

The model assumes that a group of miners are on an island containing
gold. Umbeck makes several simplifying assumptions about life on the
island: (1) there is no government to enforce any laws, (2) Any contract
that could be entered into that does not involve violence is
prohibitively expensive, (3) Violence as the amount of labor time it
takes to exclude others from a price of land, (4) the miners can
costlessly determine the amount of violence other miners are willing to
engage in, and (5) Anarchy is not possible.

Umbeck land allocation under two regimes. In the first the land is
homogeneous as are the miners. In the second the miners are still
homogeneous, but the land is now heterogeneous. He shows that in the
first case the land is evenly dived amongst the miners. In the second
case Umbeck shows that the land is dived such that miners with more
productive land will have less of it, while miners with more productive
land will have more of it, to the point that each miner is able to get
the same amount of gold per allotment of land. These results coincides
with intuition in a mechanism that distributes by price; miners that
have the same ability to pay (because of the homogeneity assumption)
with homogenous land will evenly distribute the land, while
heterogeneous land will cause smaller parcels of the more valuable land
held. Not included in the model in the analysis so far was the ability
to form coalitions. Although Umbeck notes that this will change the
distribution of the land, it is not included in the paper because it was
not a problem in the California Gold Rush, as shown later on the in
paper.

Formally defined mineral rights in California during the Gold Rush were
absent due to impotence of the military government established after the
annexation of California from Mexico by the U.S. government. Mexican
laws were to be used (so long as they did not contradict the
Constitution), but were scrapped with the discovery of gold, at which
point the Military Governor declared all California lands public and
owned by the Federal government. However, the governor had only a
handful of troops to cover the entire state, and this edict was largely
ignored. This did not lead to anarchy however. As more gold seekers came
to California, lead from informal property rights with threats of
violence leading just to movement of miners to more formal property
rights with ways of dealing with “claim jumpers”.

While the miners were ‘protected’ by the laws of the mining group, they
were expected to be able to protect themselves to a certain extent. They
would stake their property warning all trespassers of the consequence of
their actions. Each miner carried with him a six shooter, commonly
referred to as the great equalizer because of its ability to level the
playing field of violence. That, along with the harsh living conditions
increased the homogeneity of the miners. We see that the technology of
violence was homogeneous, but the technology of mining was also
homogeneous. It didn’t require much intelligence or grace, but it did
require a great deal of endurance. This, coupled with the harsh living
conditions, and harsh travel conditions faced by those trying to make
their way to the gold fields of California helped to weed out the weak
and left only strong miners. All of this leads to a very homogeneous
group of miners, allowing Umbeck to apply his theory to the Gold Rush
very nicely.

Although we have seen that the miners were not very different in their
ability to use violence or to mine, what was different was the quality
of the land. What we would expect from Umbeck’s theory is that the high
quality land would be claimed in smaller parcels, while low quality land
would be claimed in large parcels. What he finds from examining 106
mining districts is just that. The only cases where this is not the case
is when the mining district contains homogenous land to begin with, in
which case the land is divided up evenly, again keeping with the theory.

What Umbeck is able to show is that all ownership rights have their
foundations on the ability to forcefully exclude others, i.e. it is
force and not fairness that determines distribution in a society. A
second implication is that when policy makers are “considering possible
income redistribution programs, account must be taken not only of the
political problems and the work incentive effects but also the potential
use of force as individuals readjust their wealth positions.” [^2]

[^1]: Page 38

[^2]: Page 57
