***Umbeck – A Theory of Contract Choice and the California Gold Rush***

*Robert Cheley*

The purpose of Umbeck’s paper is to examine the contracts chosen by
miners during the California Gold Rush between 1848 and 1850 using a
pricing model developed by Cheung in his 1969 paper. Although the same
methodology used by Cheung is employed by Umbeck, three modifications
are made: (1) Because of the non-exclusivity of the property rights the
theory incorporates the additional costs associated with maintaining
exclusive rights, (2) A careful examination of gold mining
characteristics to apply Cheung’s theory, which was applied to
agriculture, and (3) Variance from gold mining income takes the place of
variance from crop prices.

Umbeck considers two types of possible contracts, a sharing contract and
a land allotment contract. Under the sharing contract the miners agree
to work a certain number of hours on a common plot of land and share the
gold that is found by the group according to some rule; no exclusion of
members is allowed when working the land. Under the land allotment
contract each miner is given a claim of land; all of the gold found on
that plot of land is his alone. Umbeck identifies three separate
categories of costs when comparing the two types of contracts: (1) Costs
of reaching an initial settlement allocation, (2) measuring the agreed
distribution, and (3) enforcing contractual provisions.

In the case of reaching an initial allocation, both contracts have the
same underlying problem for the participants, i.e. to maximize net
present wealth, either by allocation of gold or by allocation of land.
Therefore Umbeck claims that there should be no real differences between
the costs in the two contracts. Measurement for the sharing contract
only requires weighing of the gold collected by the participants,
whereas with the land contract costs are incurred when the land is
measured and divided, unless the land is homogeneous with respect to its
gold yield. In the example examined by Umbeck the land is homogenous in
gold yield and thus the costs of dividing the land are negligible.
However, Umbeck notes that the division process occurs only once with
the land contract, but occurs at the end of each production cycle in the
sharing contract, thus the costs with the land allotment contract costs
would be lower in this case. Exclusion of non-members will have the same
costs regardless of the contract chosen, but stealing by members will
vary depending on the contract chosen and the number of members. Umbeck
reasons that the because of the ease in which members can cheat one
another under the sharing agreement would cause, the costs of the
sharing contract to exceed the costs of the land allotment contract in
the gold mining case. This can be further seen by the extra costs
incurred by the members for enforcing work requirements.

If cost minimization dictates the use of the Land Allotment contract,
why consider the Sharing contract at all? What has yet to be considered
so far is the variance in income from the two contracts. As Umbeck
notes, “In choosing between these two contracts, both the variance in
income and the costs of contracting must be considered.”[^1]
Specifically, individuals will try to minimize both the income variance
subject to the cost constraint. Group size will also influence the
contract chosen. Examples given by Umbeck show that as the group size
increases the type of contract that will be chosen goes from a Sharing
contract to a Land Allotment contract. This is due to the increase in
enforcement costs associated with watching all of the members of the
group to make sure that they perform their work and are not stealing
from the group.

The property rights set up by miners during the Gold Rush in California
were due to the lack of clearly defined laws regarding mineral rights,
due in most part to the American annexation of California from Mexico
around the time of the discovery of gold. Even if clearly defined rights
had been set up by the military governor of California it is doubtful
that he could have enforced the laws due to the high rate of desertion
by soldiers under his command. In this legal vacuum, miners maintained
their own laws regarding gold claims.

Technological constraints placed on the miners included the methods for
extraction. Those methods were highly labor intensive and were much more
effective when performed by two or more miners. This might help explain
the existence of Sharing contracts seen during the early part of the
gold rush, along with the small number of miners in any given area. From
the time of the first discovery of gold in 1848 until 1850 the number of
miners in California rose from an insignificant number to nearly 264
thousand. As explained earlier, this would lead us to expect contracts
to go from Sharing to Land Allotment over the two years.

What Umbeck finds is that the first contracts formed in 1848 were indeed
Sharing contracts that centered around 2 to 8 men. These men agreed to
work a specific number of hours and split the gold evenly among the
members. Several interesting features of the contract pointed out by
Umbeck were: (1) All rights were assigned prior to mining, (2) The
characteristics of cradle mining effectively reduced enforcement because
the actions of all members could be easily observed, (3) Nuggets larger
than 1 ounce were claimed only by the miner that found it, helping to
mitigate enforcement costs.

As the number of miners increased in California the original miners had
two choices. They could try and prevent the newcomers from mining, a
risky proposition given the newcomers outnumbered the original miners by
more than 100 to 1, or they could incorporate the newcomers until their
numbers were sufficient to defend their claims. What emerged were large
group of miners that now operated under the Land Allotment contract,
instead of the Sharing contract, just as predicted by Umbeck;
specifically, Umbeck finds no evidence of Sharing surviving past 1850.

Although this paper answers many questions regarding the transition from
Sharing to Land Allotment contracts seen in the California Gold Rush,
questions still remain. For instance, it implicitly assumed throughout
the paper that miners only had two contracts from which to choose.
Although this conforms to what was seen in California, there are many
other types of contracts that are available. One might ask why these
weren’t used in California. Umbeck notes that until the costs associated
with these contracts are more fully understood these questions will
remain unanswered. “The extent to which laws and institutions affect the
costs of private contract must be clearly specified in any theory of
contemporary contract choice. Notice too, that the laws and governmental
institutions are themselves affected by the costs of transactions, and
this circularity requires the specifications of a well-behaved
transaction cost function before a general equilibrium solution can be
found.” [^2]

[^1]: Page 425

[^2]: Page 437
