***Wiggins and Libecap – Oil Field Unitization: Contractual Failures on
the Presence of Imperfect Information***

*Robert Cheley*

Most problems seen in economics can be solved through contracts
generated by the involved parties, unless the transactions costs of the
solution are prohibitively high. Oil fields have many common pool
properties, with a solution of unitization being most prominently
offered. Wiggins and Libecap examine seven oil fields in the U.S.
finding empirical evidence to support the hypothesis that the
transactions costs associated with unitization were too high to make it
an universal solution concept. The principal argument put forth by the
authors is that “causes of contractual failure are imperfect and
asymmetric information that prevent agreement on lease values and
hold-out strategies of firms to increase their share of unit rents.”[^1]

When assessing value of an oil field there are two features of the
relative values of the leases a firm has. The first is that each firm
has better information about its own operations than does any other
firm, and second is that there is no standard valuation method when
valuing the leases held by a firm on an oil field. Either one of these
features is enough to breakdown the contracting process. The authors
construct two robustly simple functions that relate the public and
private information available on a firm’s lease. It is assumed that both
of these functions provide unbiased values. While differing views on the
values of the leases is critical to the breakdown of the contracting
process, it is not important whether it is driven by uncertainty about
values or because of unrecognized biases in estimated lease values.

The goal of the firm is to maximize the present value of the resource,
thus an objective function is constructed relating the profits and net
revenues when the firm is non-unitized and when it is unitized (equation
5). From this the first order conditions give joiner rules, that is
values for which the firm will join the unit and for which it will not.
Two reasons why a firm may decide not to join the unit are “(i) the
functions *g* and *h* differ so that the mappings from raw data to value
estimates are not the same; and (ii) there is private information that
causes the firm to believe estimates are inaccurate.”[^2] Firms may hold
out for either of these reasons, or because they hope that by holding
out they can change the allocation rule in their favor, a theoretical
possibility. What the authors also show is that the distribution of the
public value estimates of the lease value is critical in determining the
decision to join a unit. They posit a direct relationship between
variance of the distribution and the firm not joining the unit. The
variance of the distribution will decrease over time as more information
about the oil field becomes known. This implies that the unitization
contract will be written later in the productive life of the oil fields.

The authors find 7 testable implications of their theory: (1) As fields
age, public and private information sources converge, making agreement
on allocation rules more likely, (2) Firms with large, scattered
holdings on a field will be more willing to join and will also be more
flexible on voting on allocation rules, (3) Similarly, firms with large
blocks of contiguous acreage are more likely to withdraw and form
separate leases, (4) Leases where there is greater uncertainty of public
estimates of lease value will be less likely to join a unit, (5)
Negotiating of allocation rules for assigning unitized rental shares
will be constrained by disputes over estimates of structural
characteristics, (6) Allocation rules must assign once-and-for-all
shares, with no contingent updates, and (7) The unit operator will be
more likely to place a given lease in the unit.

The data used for the empirical study was obtained from seven Texas and
New Mexico oil fields. Hypotheses 2, 3, 4, and 7 are tested with the
following equation. The assumption of normality along with the discrete
choice nature of the model requires a Probit estimation. The regression
results presented in Table 1, panel A generally agree with the four
hypotheses tested (although hypothesis 7 does not conform to the data).
Not only does the regression generally agree with the theory,
qualitative evidence also shows that leases with very productive land
consistently withhold that land from units, despite the aggregate
benefits that would be received by all parties. When parties did
withhold land from units, they would typically form subunits for
secondary extraction, forming subunits with more homogeneous subsurface
oil deposits. What we see from the behavior of firms is that firms not
were primarily practicing hold-out strategies to gain more unit shares,
but because of asymmetric informational issues.

Hypotheses 5 and 6 were checked with qualitative data. The authors’
findings seem to support hypothesis 5. The nature of the data being
analyzed by different agents of the involved parties, which would
generally imply differing opinions on the qualitative characteristics of
differing well sites in the proposed unit. Hypothesis 6 was also
confirmed by finding that once-and-for-all shares were the standard used
by all seven oil field units. Although previous studies had found that
the primary obstacle to unitization was the hold-out, the authors
provide the following reasons for why that explanation is insufficient:
(1) Firms’ joinder decisions involved a decision to permanently withdraw
for the unit, (2) A pure strategy hold-out hypothesis also would predict
that high- and low-output leases are equally likely to delay the unit of
refuse to join (and there is no evidence of this), and (3) The Federal
lands in Wyoming show that timing plays a huge role in the decision to
unitize. “A simple hold-out strategy cannot easily explain why the
commencement of production fundamentally changes the character, speed
and success of unit contracting.”[^3]

In general what the authors find is that *ex ante* asymmetric
information and imperfections are the main obstacles to agreeing to
unitization contracting, even though large net gains would result from
unitization among the involved parties.

[^1]: Page 368

[^2]: Page 374

[^3]: Page 382
